 Microsoft OnLine User's Guide

 for IBM(R) Personal Computers and Compatibles Version 1.0

 Microsoft Corporation


 Information in this document is subject to change without notice.
 The software and/or databases described in this document are furnished
 under a license agreement or nondisclosure agreement. The software
 and/or databases may be used or copied only in accordance with the terms
 or the agreement. The purchaser may make one copy of the software for
 backup purposes. No part of this manual and/or databases may be
 reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electrical or
 mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or information and retrieval
 systems, for any purpose other than the purchaser's personal use, without
 the written permission of Microsoft Corporation.


 (c) Copyright Microsoft Corporation, 1988. All rights reserved.
 Simultaneously published in the U.S. and Canada.

 Microsoft(R), the Microsoft logo, MS-DOS(R), QuickC(TM), and Xenix(R) are
 registered and unregistered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation.

 Apple(R) is a registered trademark of Apple Computers, Inc.

 CP/M(R) is a registered trademark of Digital Research, Inc.

 GEnie(TM), Mark III(TM), and Quick-Comm(TM) are trademarks of General
 Electric Company, U.S.A.

 Hayes(R) is a registered trademark of Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc.

 IBM(R), XT(R), AT(R), and PS/2(R) are registered trademarks of
 International Business Machines Corporation.

 Turbo Pascal(R) is a registered trademark of Borland International, Inc.


 Document No. 41087001-100-R00-0588
 Part No. 02266



 Table of Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Chapter 1  Before You Begin
 Getting Information through Microsoft OnLine
 Operational Overview
 For More Information
    For Installation Problems
    For Account Information
    For Contacting the Bulletin Board Editor
    For Inquiring About Service Request Status
 About This Manual
    Symbols Used in This Manual
 Using the Microsoft OnLine Menus
    Displaying a Menu
    Choosing an Item on a Menu
    Moving Backwards through the Menus
    Removing a Menu
 Getting Help
    Displaying a Help Screen from the Menu
    Displaying a Help Screen from a Dialog Box
 Using the Keyboard with Microsoft OnLine
    Selecting  Icons
    Using Dialog Boxes
    Deleting Characters
    Inserting Characters
    Removing a Dialog Box
 Reading Alerts
 Printing Alerts
 Saving Alerts to a Disk File
 Using the Shell to DOS Icon

 Chapter 2  Installing Microsoft OnLine
 Before You Begin
    Who to Contact for More Information
 System Requirements
    Hardware
    Software
 Setting Up Your Modem
 Setting Up Your Printer
 Installing the Microsoft OnLine Software
 Setting Up Microsoft OnLine
    Setting Up Communications Parameters
    Setting Up the Communications Profile
    Setting Up Display Options
    Setting Up the ONLINE.INI File
 Changing Your Installation Parameters
    Changing the Key to Display the Menus
    Changing Communications Parameters
    Changing Communications Profile
    Changing Display Options
    Changing Your Password
 Testing Your Installation

 Chapter 3  Starting and Quitting Microsoft OnLine
 Starting Microsoft OnLine
    Selecting an Icon
    Displaying a Menu
 Connecting to the Service
 Disconnecting from the Service
    Disconnecting by Selecting an Icon
    Quitting Microsoft OnLine

 Chapter 4  Finding Answers with Microsoft OnLine
 About the Information Sources
    The Membership Book
    The Software Library
    The KnowledgeBase
 Posting Your Information in the Membership Book
 Syntax Rules for Searching the Information Sources
 Using Logical Operators
    Using the AND Operator
    Using the OR  Operator
    Using the NOT Operator
    Using Multiple Operators
 Getting a Bug or Documentation Error List
    Getting a Bug List
    Getting a Documentation Error List
 Using Other Operators
    Using Range Indicators
    Using the Suffix-Masking Operator
    Using the Segment Title Operator
    Using the Segment Date Operator
 Combining Search Words
 Excluding Press Releases
 Displaying a List of Topics
 Displaying Search Hints
 Searching the Information Sources
    Displaying Titles of Matching Items
    Opening an Item
 Downloading Items from the Information Sources
    Saving Text Items to Disk
    Printing Text Items
    Saving File Items to Disk
    Downloading Items to Your Local In Basket
 Creating a Message with Information from the KnowledgeBase
    Creating a Message
    Saving a Message
    Addressing and Sending a Message

 Chapter 5  Creating and Sending Service Requests
 Overview
 About ROP Files
 For Information about Your Service Request Status
 About Service Request Priorities
    Priority A - Critical
    Priority B - Urgent
    Priority C - Important
    Priority D - Needed
    Priority E - Interesting
    Priority F - No response is necessary
 About Service Responses
 Creating a Service Request
    Moving Around the Service Request Entry Form
    Creating a Service Request Header
    Creating a Description File
    Attaching a Description File
    Including an Attachment  File
    Creating a Supplemental Service Request
 Updating a Service Request Header
    Editing a Description File
 Sending a Service Request
 Receiving a Service Response
 Viewing a Service Request or Response
    Viewing a Service Request
    Viewing a Service Response
 Printing a Service Request or Response
    Printing a Service Request
    Printing a Service Response
 Deleting a Service Request or Response
    Deleting a Service Request
    Deleting a Service Response
 About Service Request Statuses
    Changing Service Request Status

 Chapter 6  Using Electronic Mail
 For More Information about Microsoft OnLine
 Cutting Costs Using Microsoft OnLine
 About the Address Books
 About the Out Baskets
 About the In Baskets
 Using the Keyboard with Electronic Mail
    Moving the Highlight
    Deleting Characters
    Inserting Characters
    Starting a New Line
    Using Wordwrap
    Marking a Block
    Removing a Block Marker
    Copying a Block
    Deleting a Block
    Moving a Block
 Creating Your Local Address Book
    Importing an ASCII File
    Attaching a Comment
 Saving Your Local Address Book
 Printing Your Local Address Book
 Removing Your Local Address Book
 Creating an Electronic Mail Message
    Creating a Message
    Importing an ASCII File
    Cutting and Pasting
    Returning to Edit a Message
    Closing a Message
 Saving an Electronic Mail Message
 Editing an Electronic Mail Message
 Erasing an Electronic Mail Message
 Addressing an Electronic Mail Message
 Searching the Service Address Book for an Address
    Displaying the Find Service Address Dialog Box
    Searching the Service Address Book
    Copying Addresses from the Service Address Book
 Displaying the Contents of the Out Basket
 Sending an Electronic Mail Message
    Connecting to the Service
    Sending All Messages
    Sending Selected Messages
 Correcting an Address
 Removing an Item
    Removing a Message
    Removing a File Item
 Finding Out Who Has Read Your Message
 Uploading a File to Another Subscriber
 Forwarding an Electronic Mail Message
 Printing an Electronic Mail Message
 Working with Electronic Mail Messages from Others
    Reading a Message
    Reading Multiple Messages
    Printing a Message
    Saving File Items to Disk
    Saving Messages to Disk
    Responding to a Message
 Storing Items in Your Local In Basket
 Managing Your Local Filing Cabinet
    Creating a New List
    Copying Items to a List
    Moving Items Between Lists
    Deleting Items in a List
    Deleting a List

 Chapter 7  Using the Exchange
 Finding an Item in the Exchange
 Downloading Items
    Saving a File to Disk
    Saving a Text Item to Disk
    Printing a Text Item
    Downloading Items to Your Local In Basket
 Posting an Item on the Exchange
    Posting a Text Item
    Posting a File
 Removing Your Contribution

 Chapter 8  Microsoft OnLine Reference
 Displaying System Status
    Displaying Communications Line Status
    Displaying System Usage Information
    Printing System Usage Information
    Saving System Usage Information to Disk
 Menu Commands
    Non-Service Menus
    Service Menus
 Main Screen Menu  (Non-Service)
    EDIT
    ONLINE-INFO
    ADDRESS-BOOKS
    SET-UP
    QUIT
 Local Filing Cabinet Menu (Non-Service)
    EDIT
    OUTPUT
    MOVE
    COPY
    ADD-LIST
    DELETE
    QUIT
 Local In Basket Editor Menu (Non-Service)
    PRINT
    SAVE-ON-DISK
    RESPOND
    TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 Local Out Basket List Menu (Non-Service)
    EDIT
    RE-ADDRESS
    MODIFY-MESSAGE
    CANCEL
    QUIT
 Local Out Basket Editor Menu (Non-Service)
    PRINT
    SAVE-ON-DISK
    TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 Editor Menu (Non-Service)
    RESUME
    CLOSE
    FILE
    SEND
    IMPORT
    PASTE
 Service Request Mgr Menu (Non-Service)
    RESPONSES
    CREATE
    STATUS
    DELETE
    PRINT
    UPDATE
    EDITOR
 Service Response Menu (Non-Service)
    REQUESTS
    DELETE
    PRINT
 Main Screen Menu (Service)
    EDIT
    OUTPUT
    CHANGE-PASSWORD
    STATUS
    ADDRESS-BOOKS
    QUIT
 Alert Menu (Service)
    PRINT
    SAVE-ON-DISK
 Exchange List Menu (Service)
    EDIT
    OUTPUT
    GET-ITEMS
    REMOVE
    QUIT
 Exchange Editor Menu (Service)
    PRINT
    SAVE-TO-DISK
    ADD-TO-LOCAL
    TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 Service In Basket List Menu (Service)
    EDIT
    OUTPUT
    GET-ITEMS
    RELEASE
    FORWARD
    WHO'S READ
    QUIT
 Service In Basket Editor Menu (Service)
    PRINT
    SAVE-TO-DISK
    RESPOND
    ADD-TO-LOCAL
    TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 Service Out Basket List Menu (Service)
    EDIT
    OUTPUT
    RE-ADDRESS
    MODIFY-MESSAGE
    SEND-OUTBASKET
    CANCEL
    QUIT
 Service Out Basket Editor Menu (Service)
    PRINT
    SAVE-TO-DISK
    TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 KnowledgeBase and Library Search Menus (Service)
    BEGIN-SEARCH
    DISPLAY-TITLES
    TOPICS
    SEARCH-HINTS
 KnowledgeBase and Library Title List Menus (Service)
    EDIT
    OUTPUT
    GET-ITEMS
    RESPECIFY-SEARCH
 KnowledgeBase and Library Editor Menus (Service)
    PRINT
    SAVE-TO-DISK
    ADD-TO-LOCAL
    TO-SKIP-REMAINING

 Appendix A  Microsoft OnLine Messages
 Message Codes 0 - 99
 Message Codes 100 -199
 Message Codes 200 - 299
 Message Codes 300 - 399
 Message Codes 400 - 499
 Message Codes 500 - 599
 Message Codes 600 - 699
 Message Codes 700 - 799
 Message Codes 900 - 999
 Message Codes 4001 - 4999
 Message Codes 5000 - 5999
 Message Codes 6000 - 6999
 Message Codes 9000 - 9999

 Appendix B  Terms

 Appendix C  Customizing Microsoft OnLine
 Icon Picture Definition
 Icon Definition Records
 Icon Definition Fields
    Picture Tag
    Title
    When
    PCExit
    PCHandle
    Command
    HSExit
    HSString
 Sample BT50.ZIF Modification
    Icon Picture Definition
    Icon Definition Records

 Appendix D  Creating Dialog Files
 Special Characters
 Rules for Creating Dialog Files
 Dialog File Commands
    BREAK
    CASE
    DROP n
    DUMP
    EOL \hexval\ | NONE
    GOTO <label>
    LABEL <label>
    MASK <pin> <switch>
    SEND 'data'
    SEND 'data[N]data'
    TIMEOUT <number>
    WAITFOR <time>
    WAITFOR <pin>
    WAITFOR 'text' [ELSE <label>]
 Contents of a Sample LOGON.DIA File

 Index


 Chapter 1.  Before You Begin
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter describes:

    ş   Getting information from Microsoft OnLine.

    ş   An operational overview of Microsoft OnLine.

    ş   Who to call or send an Electronic Mail Message to for assistance or
        more information.

    ş   This manual's use of symbols.

    ş   Using the Microsoft OnLine Menus.

    ş   Displaying and removing Help screens.

    ş   Using the keyboard with Microsoft OnLine.

    ş   Reading, printing, and saving Alerts, which are important information
        posted on the System by the Microsoft System Administrator.

    ş   Using the Shell to DOS Icon.

 Microsoft OnLine is a technical support system designed for information
 center managers and software developers who use Microsoft software products.
 With Microsoft OnLine, you can access information on bulletin boards, search
 through libraries for specific answers, and submit Service Requests directly
 to Microsoft's Support Engineers.

 The key to your Microsoft OnLine System is the Microsoft OnLine
 microcomputer program, which you can use to prepare and send Service
 Requests, to receive a response to your Service Requests, to search the
 Information Sources, to send and receive Quik-Comm Electronic Mail Messages,
 and to send and receive information from other subscribers through the
 Exchange. You can also configure the Microsoft OnLine program to meet your
 specific needs.

 Telephone links established by dialing through the Microsoft OnLine System
 send your call to Microsoft or to another subscriber, as appropriate.

 At the Microsoft end, your Service Request is routed to the Support
 Engineer with the relevant product expertise to answer your questions.
 Behind the Microsoft OnLine System and the Support Engineers stand the
 Microsoft Support Management Team. This team is committed to giving the
 Support Engineers the necessary management backup to ensure that you get the
 information you need.


 Getting Information through Microsoft OnLine

 Microsoft OnLine offers many ways for you to get information. We recommend
 that you follow this sequence when requesting information in order to get
 the most from your Microsoft OnLine subscription.

 You can get information fastest from the Information Sources. Editors at
 Microsoft post information and resolutions to other subscribers' Service
 Requests in the Information Sources, which are text databases that you can
 search. The Information Sources are the KnowledgeBase, the Membership Book,
 and the Software Library. You'll get accurate and up-to-date product
 information, ranging from articles and announcements to detailed technical
 information.

 Enlist the experience and expertise of other Microsoft OnLine
 subscribers. You can use the Exchange to post your questions, ideas, tips,
 or answers for other Microsoft OnLine subscribers. And, since other
 subscribers also post this type of information, you may be able to find an
 answer to your specific question.

 Use Quik-Comm Electronic Mail to send and receive messages quickly. You
 can use Electronic Mail to send and receive messages and files.

 Send a Service Request if you can't find the answer to your question in
 the Information Sources. Use a Service Request to request specific,
 detailed answers to your questions. The answer to your Service Request,
 minus any confidential information, will also be posted in the KnowledgeBase
 for use by other subscribers.


 Operational Overview

 Microsoft OnLine has two general modes of operation: Disconnected from the
 Service and Connected to the Service.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   Because you are billed for the time that you are connected to the Service,
   it is to your advantage to do as much of your work as possible while
   disconnected from the Service.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 When your microcomputer is disconnected from the Service, use Microsoft
 OnLine to:

    ş   Create, edit, and address Quik-Comm Electronic Mail Messages.

    ş   Change your Local Address Book, which you use to address your
        Electronic Mail Messages.

    ş   Change your Setup Parameters, such as phone number or modem baud
        rate.

    ş   Create and edit Service Requests.

    ş   Manage items in your Local Filing Cabinet.

 When your microcomputer is connected to the Service, use Microsoft OnLine
 to:

    ş   Send and receive files and Quik-Comm Electronic Mail Messages.

    ş   Send Service Requests to Microsoft and receive Service Responses,
        which are responses to these requests.

    ş   Search the Information Sources for specific information and download
        that information to your computer.

    ş   Change your Password.


 For More Information

 If you need specific information that you can't find in the Information
 Sources, the Exchange, or this User's Guide, Microsoft OnLine has several
 Electronic Mail Aliases and two phone numbers you can use. One phone number
 is for installation problems and another phone number is for account or
 billing information. To use the aliases, you need to know how to use
 Microsoft OnLine Electronic Mail, which is described in Chapter 6, "Using
 Electronic Mail."

 For Installation Problems

 If you're having installation or operation problems, call (206) 882-8089
 for assistance. For example, call this number if you have all the
 information and tools you need, but the System isn't working properly or you
 get busy signals when you try to connect to the Service.

 For Account Information

 If you have questions about your account, you can call the (800-443-4672)
 for assistance.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   Do not use this phone number to inquire about your Service Request status.
   Use the alias SR-STATUS to inquire about your Service Request status.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Call this number when you:

    ş   Need information or tools to get Microsoft OnLine working properly on
        your computer. For example, you've ordered the software, but it
        hasn't arrived yet or you don't know your Password.

    ş   Have a question about your subscription. For example, if you have
        questions about billing or renewing your subscription.

 If you need account information, you can send Electronic Mail to the alias
 ACCOUNT. Use this alias when you:

    ş   Need subscription renewal, options, or cost information.

    ş   Have questions about billing.

    ş   Want to change your address, phone number, or contact person.

 For Contacting the Bulletin Board Editor

 If you want to contact the Bulletin Board Editor, send Electronic Mail to
 the alias EDITOR. Use this alias when you:

    ş   Want to comment on the Microsoft OnLine Service as a whole.

    ş   Have general questions about the Service.

    ş   Need general help for operating Microsoft OnLine.

    ş   Want to submit a problem you are having with the Microsoft OnLine
        Service.

    ş   Want to make a suggestion about the Microsoft OnLine Service. You can
        also post suggestions publicly in the Exchange.

 The Editor will always respond to your input.

 For Inquiring About Service Request Status

 If you want to inquire about the status of your Service Request, send
 Electronic Mail to the alias SR-STATUS. You should inquire about the
 status of your Service Request only if you haven't received an
 acknowledgement to your request within 24 hours or if there has been a long
 period of time since the last response from Microsoft.

 Please include the Service Request Reference ID Number, the product name,
 and the priority of your request. The Editor will respond with the current
 status of your Service Request.


 About This Manual

 This manual describes how to use Microsoft OnLine to get information over
 the phone lines from Microsoft and other subscribers. This manual assumes
 you are familiar with operating a microcomputer, modem, and associated
 software (applications and operating systems).

 Symbols Used in This Manual

 The symbols used in this manual have the following meanings:

 ÜÜÜ  This box indicates a procedure follows.

    1.  Numbered lists indicate sequential steps for completing a procedure.

    ş   A single square bullet indicates a one-step procedure. More than one
        square bullet indicates a list of items or topics.

 ALL CAPITALS indicate the names of programs and their files. When you type
 the names, you can use either uppercase or lowercase letters.

 ITALICS indicate words and characters you type on the keyboard or see on
 the screen or the name of documents. Italics are also used for emphasizing
 important words, such as the alias EDITOR.

 STANDOUT ALL CAPITALS indicate keynames, for example ENTER, SHIFT, UP, or
 DOWN.

 When you use commands that require pressing the CTRL key and another key,
 make certain that you press both keys simultaneously. In this manual,
 pressing the CTRL key and another key at the same time is denoted as
 CTRL+X.


 Using the Microsoft OnLine Menus

 Microsoft OnLine displays different menus at the top of your screen
 depending on which dialog box or screen is displayed. You can display or
 remove the menu whenever you want to.

 You display the menu by pressing a specific key, which you can define as a
 function, ALT, or CTRL key combination. Or you can press the default key
 F1 to display the menus. For information on how to redefine a key to
 display the menus, see Chapter 2, "Installing Microsoft OnLine."

 Some dialog boxes also display a menu at the bottom. Usually these menus
 have two or three items, such as YES, NO, and HELP. You use the same
 keystrokes to choose items in these small menus that you use to choose items
 in the menus displayed at the top of the screen.

 Displaying a Menu

 ÜÜÜ  To display a menu

    ş   Press the F1 key or the key that you defined to display the menus.
        This manual assumes you are using the F1 key.

 Choosing an Item on a Menu

 ÜÜÜ  To choose an item on the menu

    1.  Once you've displayed the menu, press the SPACEBAR, BACKSPACE, or
        LEFT or RIGHT keys to move the highlight to select the item you
        want.

    2.  Press ENTER.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 SHORTCUT
   When a menu is displayed, you can select a menu item by pressing the first
   letter of that item. For example, when a menu is displayed, you can press
   E to choose EDIT.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Moving Backwards through the Menus

 ÜÜÜ  To move backwards in the menu tree

    ş   Press ESC.

 Removing a Menu

 ÜÜÜ  To remove a menu

    ş   Press ESC.


 Getting Help

 Microsoft OnLine displays different Help screens depending on what dialog
 box or screen is displayed. You can display a Help screen from the menu that
 appears at the top of the display or from a dialog box.

 Displaying a Help Screen from the Menu

 ÜÜÜ  To display a Help screen from the menu

    1.  Display the screen for which you want help.

    2.  Display the menu by pressing F1 or the key you defined to display
        the menus.

    3.  Choose HELP from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a Help screen for the current screen.

 ÜÜÜ  To use menu help

    ş   Choose NEXT to display the next Help screen on the same topic.

    ş   Choose PREVIOUS to display the previous Help screen on the same
        topic.

 ÜÜÜ  To remove a Help screen

    ş   Press ESC or choose RESUME from the menu on the Help screen.

        Microsoft OnLine returns to the screen displayed when you chose
        Help.

 Displaying a Help Screen from a Dialog Box

 ÜÜÜ  To display a Help screen from a dialog box

    1.  Display the dialog box for which you want help.

    2.  Choose HELP from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a Help screen for the current dialog box.

 ÜÜÜ  To use dialog box help

    ş   Choose NEXT to display the next Help screen on the same topic.

    ş   Choose PREVIOUS to display the previous Help screen on the same
        topic.

 ÜÜÜ  To remove a Help screen

    ş   Press ESC or choose RESUME from the menu on the Help screen.

 Microsoft OnLine returns to the dialog box or screen displayed when you
 chose Help.


 Using the Keyboard with Microsoft OnLine

 Selecting Icons

 You select icons to accomplish a task (for example, connecting to the
 Service), to display information (for example, the contents of the In or Out
 Basket), and to gain access to the KnowledgeBase, the Exchange, and the
 Libraries. You can't select an empty box on the display.

 ÜÜÜ  To select an icon

    ş   Use the direction keys to position the highlight on the icon and
        press ENTER.

 Using Dialog Boxes

 You use the dialog boxes to enter information like your System Access
 Number and Password. When OnLine displays a dialog box, the following
 keyboard functions are available.

      To Move the Highlight        Press

      To the previous field        UP or SHIFT+TAB
      on a dialog box

      To the next field on         DOWN or TAB
      a dialog box

      Left one character           LEFT

      Right one character          RIGHT

 Deleting Characters

      To Delete                    Press

      The highlighted character    DEL

      The character immediately    BACKSPACE
      to the left of the
      highlight

      All the characters to the    CTRL+D
      right of the cursor on the
      current line

 Inserting Characters

 ÜÜÜ  To insert characters

    ş   Press the INSERT key.

 Microsoft OnLine toggles between Insert Mode and Overtype Mode when you
 press the INSERT key. The default setting is Overtype Mode.

 Removing a Dialog Box

 ÜÜÜ  To remove a dialog box

    ş   Press ESC.


 Reading Alerts

 When you are connected to the Service and you see an Alert Icon on the Main
 Screen, open it immediately. The Alert Icon is reserved for important
 information or special announcements posted by the Microsoft System
 Administrator. You can read the alert, print it on your printer, or save it
 to a disk file.

 ÜÜÜ  To read the Alert

    ş   Select the Alert Icon and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Alert Text.

 ÜÜÜ  To remove the Alert Text

    ş   Press ESC.


 Printing Alerts

 ÜÜÜ  To print the Alert on your printer

    1.  After you've selected the Alert Icon, press F1 to display the
        menu.

    2.  Choose PRINT.


 Saving Alerts to a Disk File

 ÜÜÜ  To save the Alert to a disk file

    1.  After you've selected the Alert Icon, press F1 to display the
        menu.

    2.  Choose SAVE-ON-DISK.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a dialog box for you to fill in.

    3.  Type the name of the file in which you want to save the Alert.

    4.  Choose YES from the menu and press ENTER. Microsoft OnLine copies
        the Alert to the file you specified on your disk.

 If you decide that you don't want to save the Alert, choose NO and press
 ENTER.


 Using the Shell to DOS Icon

 The Shell to DOS Icon allows you to run other programs and DOS commands
 without quitting Microsoft OnLine. If you change subdirectories, be sure to
 change back to the subdirectory where the Microsoft OnLine program files are
 located before typing exit.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   When you select the Shell to DOS Icon while you are connected to the
   Service, be sure to return to Microsoft OnLine within 7 or 8 minutes. If
   you are connected to the Service and there has been no transmission
   activity for 10 minutes, you will be disconnected from the Service without
   warning. If this happens, you may need to reboot your microcomputer to
   recover.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 ÜÜÜ  To use the Shell to DOS Icon

    1.  Select the Shell to DOS Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Type the filename to start a program or type a DOS command.

    3.  When done, type exit at the DOS prompt to return to Microsoft
        OnLine.


 Chapter 2.  Installing Microsoft OnLine
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter describes how to:

    ş   Determine if you have the proper hardware and software to run
        Microsoft OnLine.

    ş   Install Microsoft OnLine software.

    ş   Set up Microsoft OnLine.

    ş   Change Installation Parameters.

 Before you try to install Microsoft OnLine, check that you have your
 Microsoft OnLine enrollment information which came in a separate mailing
 from this manual


 Before You Begin

 Who to Contact for More Information

 If you have problems installing the software, if it doesn't work properly,
 or if you have questions about your account, you can call the phone numbers
 or send an Electronic Mail Message to the aliases listed in the section
 titled "For More Information" in Chapter 1, "Before You Begin."


 System Requirements

 You'll need the following hardware and software to install and run
 Microsoft OnLine:

 Hardware

    ş   An IBM XT, AT, or PS/2 or compatible with 500K free memory.

    ş   A hard disk.

    ş   A monochrome or color display with an appropriate adapter card.

    ş   A printer (optional).

    ş   A telephone line you can use with a modem.

    ş   An internal or external modem that is 100% Hayes-compatible and can
        run at 300, 1200, or 2400 baud. If the modem is external, you'll also
        need a serial or multifunction card with appropriate cables.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   You can find additional information about memory, installation, and
   configuration requirements in the README.DOC file on the Microsoft OnLine
   Utilities disk 1 in 5.25-inch format or the Program 2 disk in 3.5-inch
   format.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Software

    ş   MS-DOS (Version 3.0 or later) or compatible.

    ş   Microsoft OnLine software, which consists of four 5.25-inch disks
        (two Program and two Utilities disks) or two 3.5-inch disks (two
        Program disks).

    ş   A FILES=20 statement in your CONFIG.SYS file. Depending on your
        system, you may want to set the maximum number of files as greater
        than 20.

    ş   DOS Path set to point to location of the COMMAND.COM file.

    ş   The text editor of your choice.


 Setting Up Your Modem

 Before you can install Microsoft OnLine, you need to set up your modem
 hardware. Follow the instructions in your modem manufacturer's documentation
 for installation. However, you don't need to use the DOS Mode command to
 configure the serial port connected to the modem because Microsoft OnLine
 configures the port automatically when you connect to the Service.


 Setting Up Your Printer

 You can print messages and other items from Microsoft OnLine on the printer
 attached to your computer. The default printer port is LPT1. You can
 redirect the output to the serial ports using the DOS Mode command. For more
 information, see your DOS manual.


 Installing the Microsoft OnLine Software

 Microsoft OnLine runs as an application under DOS. You can install and run
 Microsoft OnLine on your microcomputer hard disk.

 You can assign any name to the subdirectory where the Microsoft OnLine
 files reside; this manual uses the subdirectory name \online.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   You can find additional information about memory, installation, and
   configuration requirements in the README.DOC file on the Microsoft OnLine
   Utilities disk 1 in 5.25-inch format or the Program 2 disk in 3.25-inch
   format.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 ÜÜÜ  To install Microsoft OnLine on a hard disk

    1.  Put the Microsoft OnLine Utilities disk 1 in 5.25-inch format or the
        Program 2 disk in 3.5-inch format into your disk drive.

    2.  Type x: install z\nnnnnnnn and press ENTER.

        x is the drive designator for the drive that contains the Microsoft
        OnLine Utilities disk 1 or Program disk 2.

        z is the drive designator for the disk on which you want to install
        Microsoft OnLine.

        \nnnnnnnn is the subdirectory where you want to install Microsoft
        OnLine.

    3.  Follow the instructions on the screen.

    4.  Edit the ONLINE.INI file. See the section titled "Setting Up the
        ONLINE.INI File" in this chapter for information.

    5.  Put the statement FILES=20 in your CONFIG.SYS file. Depending on your
        system, you may want to set the maximum number of files as greater
        than 20.

    6.  Set your DOS Path to point to the subdirectory where COMMAND.COM is
        located.


 Setting Up Microsoft OnLine

 Once you've installed the software and the modem, you need to configure
 Microsoft OnLine for communication with the Service. Before you set up the
 software for communications, you'll need to know your:

    ş   System Access Number.

    ş   System Password.

    ş   Quik-Comm Electronic Mail Address.

    ş   Quik-Comm Password.

    ş   Telephone number used to establish communications with the Service.

 Your Microsoft System Administrator should provide this information for
 you. If you don't have all this information, see the section titled "For
 More Information" in Chapter 1, "Before You Begin."

 You can change the Configuration Parameters at any time either permanently
 or until you quit the program. If you choose to save the Configuration
 Parameters, these changes are written to the file BTCONFIG. If you choose to
 use the Configuration Parameters only until you quit the program, these
 changes will not be saved; and the next time you start the program, the
 Configuration Parameters in the file BTCONFIG will be used.

 To set Configuration Parameters for the first time, you'll set up:

    ş   Communications Parameters.

    ş   Communications Profile.

    ş   Display Options.

 Setting Up Communications Parameters

 ÜÜÜ  To set Communications Parameters

    1.  Start Microsoft OnLine by typing online at the DOS prompt from the
        subdirectory containing the program files and press ENTER.

        If you're starting the program for the first time, Microsoft OnLine
        displays the Communications dialog box, where you enter information
        for establishing communications with the Service.

    2.  Type your System Access Number and press ENTER.

    3.  Type your System Password and press ENTER.

        For security reasons, Microsoft OnLine doesn't display the System
        Password when you type it. Instead, Microsoft OnLine displays an
        exclamation point (!) for each character you type.

    4.  Type your Quik-Comm Electronic Mail Address and press ENTER.

    5.  Type the telephone number that the modem will dial to connect to the
        Service and press ENTER.

        If you need to dial an outside line before dialing the phone number
        to access the Service, type the number to get an outside line
        followed by a comma (,). The comma inserts a half-second delay; you
        can also include more than one comma if you need more time.

        For example, if the number to get an outside line is 9, you need a
        one-second delay to connect to the outside line, and the number you
        want to dial is (206) 555-1111, you would type 9,,2065551111.

    6.  Select the communications port that the modem is connected to and
        press ENTER.

        The default communication port is COM1.

    7.  Select the baud rate for your modem and press ENTER.

        The default baud rate is 1200, but you can change it if your modem
        operates at a higher or lower baud rate.

    8.  Choose YES to save the data you entered in the configuration file
        BTCONFIG.

        If you choose NO during initial installation, you will be returned to
        DOS and none of the parameters you chose will be saved.

 Setting  Up the Communications Profile

 If you're starting the program for the first time, you set up Communication
 Parameters and then Microsoft OnLine displays the Profile dialog box, which
 You fill in to choose how it works with your microcomputer.

 ÜÜÜ  To set up the Communications Profile

    1.  On the first line, Data Location, type the disk drive letter and the
        subdirectory where you want Microsoft OnLine to store your Out Basket
        and any temporary files it creates. Then press ENTER.

        You should select the drive with the greatest amount of storage space
        available and the subdirectory you type should already exist. You can
        use the subdirectory that contains the program and Help files, or you
        can create a subdirectory under this subdirectory, to store the data
        files.

        If you create a subdirectory for data files that is different from
        the subdirectory for the program files, be sure that the file
        BT50.ZIF is in the subdirectory containing the data files.

    2.  Select Sound ON or OFF and press ENTER.

        If you select ON, Microsoft OnLine sounds tones when you open or
        close dialog boxes or icons, or mark items in a list. If you select
        OFF, Microsoft OnLine doesn't sound tones except for invalid
        keystrokes.

    3.  Select Debug ON or OFF and press ENTER.

        If you select ON, Microsoft OnLine generates a log file named
        between your computer and the Service. Typically, you would set Debug
        OFF, which is the default setting; set Debug ON if you need a
        diagnostic aid should a communication problem occur. You should leave
        Debug OFF unless you are asked to turn it ON by your Microsoft System
        Administrator.

    4.  Choose YES to save the data you entered in the configuration file
        BTCONFIG. If you choose NO during initial installation, you will be
        returned to DOS and none of the parameters you chose will be saved.

 Setting Up Display Options

 Display Options control how Microsoft OnLine displays lists of messages. In
 general, you can select FIFO (First In First Out) or LIFO (Last In First
 Out) for the lists that display unread messages, read messages, and messages
 you have sent. Select the Display Option you want for each of the lists.

 LIFO displays the newest messages at the top of the lists. FIFO displays
 the newest messages at the bottom of the lists.

 ÜÜÜ  To set Display Options

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose SET-UP.

    3.  Choose QUIK-COMM-OPTIONS. Microsoft OnLine displays the Display
        Options dialog box.

    4.  For the Unread Quik-Comms List, which contains messages sent to you
        that you haven't read yet, select LIFO or FIFO and press ENTER.

    5.  For the Read Quik-Comms List, which contains messages sent to you
        that you have read, select LIFO or FIFO and press ENTER.

    6.  For the Sent Quik-Comms List, which contains messages you've sent to
        other subscribers, select LIFO or FIFO and press ENTER.

    7.  For Read Items using, choose LIST or SCAN.

        If you choose LIST, Microsoft OnLine will take messages out of your
        Service In Basket and put them in the Read Quik-Comm List in your
        Local In Basket after you have read the message.

        If you choose SCAN, Microsoft OnLine will not remove read messages
        from your Service In Basket; even though you have read a message, it
        will not be placed in your Local In Basket.

    8.  Choose YES to save this information in the configuration file
        BTCONFIG.

        Choose NO to use these options until you quit the program.

 Setting Up the ONLINE.INI File

 The file ONLINE.INI contains information that Microsoft OnLine needs to
 process your Service Requests. You open this file with your favorite editor
 or with the Microsoft OnLine editor, enter the information without embedding
 control or extended characters, and then save it as an ASCII (unformatted)
 file. The ONLINE.INI file should be in the same subdirectory as the
 Microsoft OnLine program files.

 Here's an example of the contents of the ONLINE.INI file:

      Editor:c:\word4\word.com     ;DOS path/file limitation (include
                                   extension)

      Printer:PRN                  ;printer device

      RefCon:IBM PC with Mach 20   ;65-char max hardware configuration

      First Name:John              ;15-char max

      Last Name:Doe                ;20-char max

      Phone:(206) 555-4587         ;21-char max

 ÜÜÜ  To set up the ONLINE.INI file

    1.  Open the file ONLINE.INI with your editor.

    2.  On the Editor line, type the drive designator, the full path name for
        your editor, and the .COM or .EXE file used to start the editor. You
        can type up to 63 characters including spaces.

    3.  On the Printer line, type the printer port your computer will be
        using. If you type PRN, you can redirect the output with DOS. You
        can also type LPT1: for a parallel printer. You can type up to 5
        characters.

    4.  On the RefCon line, type the model of computer you are using. You can
        type up to 65 characters. Be sure to include any accelerator,
        expanded memory, or network cards. This information will assist
        Microsoft in providing a timely, accurate response to your Service
        Request.

    5.  On the Name lines, type your first and last names. You can type up to
        15 characters including spaces for the first name and up to 20
        characters for the last name.

    6.  On the Phone line, type your area code and phone number. You can type
        up to 21 characters including spaces.

    7.  Save the file as an ASCII (unformatted) file.


 Changing Your Installation Parameters

 After initial installation, you may want to change your Installation
 Parameters for a single communications session or permanently.

 When you change the parameters and choose NO at the bottom of the dialog
 boxes, Microsoft OnLine will use the parameters you selected only until you
 quit the program. When you change these parameters permanently by choosing
 YES at the bottom of the dialog boxes, Microsoft OnLine stores the
 information in the configuration file BTCONFIG.

 You can change the following Installation Parameters:

    ş   The key you press to display the menus (for all modules except the
        Service Request module).

    ş   Communications Parameters.

    ş   Communications Profile.

    ş   Display Options.

    ş   Your Password.

 Changing the Key to Display the Menus

 You can change the key you press to display the menus in all modules except
 for the Service Request Mgr Module. In the Service Request Mgr Module, you
 must press the F1 key to display the menu.

 ÜÜÜ  To change the key used to display the menus

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 or the key you defined to display the
        menus.

    2.  Choose SET-UP from the menu.

    3.  Choose KEYS from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a dialog box where you can select the key
        or a combination of keys.

    4.  If you want to use a function key other than F1, just press that
        function key.

        If you want to use an ALT or CTRL key combination, press the
        ALT or CTRL key followed by the other key.

        In either case, Microsoft OnLine displays the keystroke you entered
        and bolds YES at the bottom of the dialog box. If you want to change
        the key again before choosing YES, press SHIFT+TAB to move the
        highlight up so you can select another key.

        You can't use the ENTER and direction keys, such as UP, DOWN,
        or END, to display the menu. In addition, don't use an alphanumeric
        key because you won't be able to use that key for text entry.

    5.  Choose YES at the bottom of the dialog box if you want to save the
        new key in the configuration file. Or choose NO if you want to use
        the new keystroke only until you quit the program.

 Changing Communications Parameters

 ÜÜÜ  To change Communications Parameters

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose SET-UP.

    3.  Choose COMMUNICATIONS.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Communications dialog box.

    4.  Make any changes you need to the items on this dialog box.

 If you are not sure what each of these items does, see the section titled
 "Setting Up Communications Parameters" earlier in this chapter.

 Changing Communications Profile

 ÜÜÜ  To change Communications Profile information

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose SET-UP.

    3.  Choose PROFILE.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Profile dialog box.

    4.  Make any changes you need to the items on this dialog box.

 If are you not sure what each of these items does, see the section titled
 "Setting Up Communications Profile" earlier in this chapter.

 Changing Display Options

 ÜÜÜ  To change the Display Options

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose SET-UP.

    3.  Choose QUIK-COMM OPTIONS.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Display Options dialog box.

    4.  Make any changes you need to the items on this dialog box.

 If you are not sure what each of these items does, see the section titled
 "Setting Up Display Options" earlier in this chapter.

 Changing Your Password

 You can change the Password you enter for the Quik-Comm Password. Microsoft
 recommends that you change your initial password during your first session
 for security reasons.

 To change your Password, you must be connected to the Service. The new
 Password takes effect immediately. For security reasons, Microsoft OnLine
 doesn't display your Password when you enter it. Instead, Microsoft OnLine
 displays an exclamation point (!) for each character you type.

 ÜÜÜ  To change your Password

    1.  Make sure you are connected to the Service. See the section titled
        "Connecting to the Service" in Chapter 3, "Starting and Quitting
        Microsoft OnLine," for information.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose CHANGE PASSWORD from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Change Password dialog box.

    4.  Type your old Quik-Comm Password on the first line.

    5.  Type your new Quik-Comm Password on the second line.

    6.  Type your new Quik-Comm Password again on the third line to verify
        your entry.

    7.  If you want to make the Password you just typed your new Password,
        choose YES from the menu at the bottom of the dialog box. Otherwise,
        choose NO from the menu.


 Testing Your Installation

 After you have installed the modem and the software, try to establish
 communications with the Service. For instructions see Chapter 3, "Starting
 and Quitting Microsoft OnLine." You may also want to follow some of the
 practice sessions in the Microsoft OnLine Tutorial, contained in a
 separate binder. This Tutorial contains some practice sessions for the
 first-time Microsoft OnLine subscriber who already knows how to use
 microcomputers.


 Chapter 3.  Starting and Quitting Microsoft OnLine
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter describes how to:

    ş   Start Microsoft OnLine with a hard disk system.

    ş   Connect to the Service.

    ş   Disconnect from the Service when you're done with your session.

    ş   Quit the Microsoft OnLine program.

 If you haven't installed Microsoft OnLine on your personal computer and set
 up the modem connection, please go to Chapter 2, "Installing Microsoft
 OnLine," before proceeding.

 Once you install Microsoft OnLine, you can start it and have access to
 Microsoft's information base. After you are done using Microsoft OnLine, you
 disconnect from the Service first and then exit the program. Microsoft
 OnLine also allows you to disconnect from the Service when you quit the
 program.


 Starting Microsoft OnLine

 Microsoft OnLine runs as an application under DOS. Once you've installed
 the Microsoft OnLine files on your hard disk system, you start the program
 from the subdirectory where it is installed. This manual references the
 subdirectory \online, but you can assign any name to the subdirectory where
 the program files reside. See the section titled "Setting Up the
 Communications Profile" in Chapter 2, "Installing Microsoft OnLine," for
 more information.

 ÜÜÜ  To start Microsoft OnLine with a hard disk system

    1.  Make sure the DOS prompt is showing on the screen.

    2.  At the DOS prompt, type

           cd \online

        and press ENTER.

    3.  When the DOS prompt reappears, type

           online

        and press ENTER to start the program and display the Main Screen.

 When you are not connected to the Service, the icons on the Main Screen are
 created based on the information in the BT50.ZIF file, which you can modify
 to display custom icons. For information, see Appendix C, "Customizing
 Microsoft OnLine."

    A   Connect to Service Icon. Begins automatic procedure to connect to the
        Service.

    B   In Basket Icon. Contains messages you receive from other subscribers
        and your Local Filing Cabinet.

    C   Out Basket Icon. Contains messages you create until you send the
        messages.

    D   Service Request Mgr Icon. Lets you create, change, print, view, or
        delete a Service Request.

    E   Shell to DOS Icon. Runs other program and DOS commands without
        leaving Microsoft OnLine.

 Selecting an Icon

 ÜÜÜ  To select an icon

    ş   Press the direction keys to position the highlight on the icon you
        want and press ENTER.

        You cannot select an empty box on the display.

 Displaying a Menu

 ÜÜÜ  To display a menu

    ş   Press F1 or the key you defined to display the menu.


 Connecting to the Service

 Before you can send an Electronic Mail Message, a Service Request, or
 receive any kind of information from Microsoft OnLine, you need to connect
 to the Service.

 ÜÜÜ  To connect to the Service

    1.  Start Microsoft OnLine.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Main Screen.

    2.  At the main menu, use the direction keys to select the Connect to
        Service Icon.

    3.  Press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Connect to Service dialog box.

    4.  Type your Password in the Password field. Microsoft OnLine doesn't
        display the Password as you type; it displays only exclamation marks
        (!!!).

    5.  After you've typed your Password, press ENTER.

    6.  If you don't need to change any information on this dialog box, press
        the direction keys to select YES at the bottom on the dialog box and
        press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine begins connecting to the Service. The logon
        procedure is automatic. You can follow this logon procedure on the
        Connect to Service screen by reading the messages for the nine-step
        sequence.

        The nine connection steps and the messages displayed are:

        1.   Initiating connection to Microsoft OnLine...

        2.   Verifying modem connection...

        3.   Dialing the access number...

        4.   Beginning connection to the System...

        5.   Sending account logon information...

        6.   Connection to Microsoft OnLine in progress...

        7.   Establishing error-free communication...

        8.   Checking available services...

        9.   Connection to Microsoft OnLine complete!!!

    7.  Microsoft OnLine displays the Main Screen again, but there are new
        icons on it. Some of these icons are created based on the information
        in the BT50.ZIF file and some are downloaded from the Service. You
        may see all of these icons, some of them, or some new icons when you
        connect to the Service.

    A   Disconnect from Service Icon. Disconnects you from the Service.

    B   In Basket Icon. Contains messages you receive from other subscribers
        and your Local Filing Cabinet.

    C   Out Basket Icon. Contains messages you create until you send the
        messages.

    D   Exchange Icon. Contains information posted by other subscribers and
        the Microsoft Editor in a two-way bulletin board.

    E   KnowledgeBase Icon. Contains text information about Microsoft
        products. You use queries to search for specific information.

    F   Software Library Icon. Contains text, binary files, and archived
        files. You use queries to search for specific information.

    G   Service Request Mgr Icon. Lets you create, change, print, view, or
        delete a Service Request.

    H   Service Request Xfer Icon. Transmits completed Service Requests to
        Microsoft and receives responses.

    I   Shell to DOS Icon. Runs other program and DOS commands without
        leaving Microsoft OnLine.

    J   Minutes Remaining. The number of minutes before an automatic
        disconnect.

 If you are downloading a file and your session time runs out, Microsoft
 OnLine will finish downloading the file before it disconnects.


 Disconnecting from the Service

 After you are done with your session, you should disconnect. You can
 disconnect from the Service either by selecting an icon or using the menu,
 which also quits Microsoft OnLine.

 Disconnecting by Selecting an Icon

 ÜÜÜ  To disconnect from the Service using the icon

    ş   At the Main Screen, select the Disconnect from Service Icon and press
        ENTER.

 Microsoft OnLine disconnects you from the Service and returns you to the
 Main Screen.

 Quitting Microsoft OnLine

 ÜÜÜ  To quit Microsoft OnLine

    1.  Display the menu by pressing the F1 key.

    2.  Press the direction keys to choose QUIT and press ENTER.

 Microsoft OnLine disconnects you from the Service and returns you to the
 DOS prompt.


 Chapter 4.  Finding Answers with Microsoft OnLine
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This section describes how to:

    ş   Search the Microsoft OnLine Information Sources for specific
        information.

    ş   Use the logical operators AND, NOT, OR, and other operators to define
        your search criteria.

    ş   Get a bug or documentation error list for a product.

    ş   Download files to your computer.

    ş   Add an item to your Local Filing Cabinet.

    ş   Create a message using information from the KnowledgeBase.

 The Information Sources have two parts: the KnowledgeBase and the
 Libraries. Both parts use a text-query method to search for specific
 information. Currently there are two Libraries: the Membership Book and the
 Software Library. Each of the Information Sources has its own icon on the
 Main Screen.

 If you enter a query and do not find the information you need, submit a
 Service Request so a Microsoft Support Engineer can respond directly.


 About the Information Sources

 The Information Sources contain two types of items: text and file items.
 Text items contain text and files contain binary or other data. Microsoft
 OnLine displays the type of each item when it displays a list of titles that
 matches your search criteria. The text and files are read-only and are
 posted by Microsoft. These items can come from Microsoft's staff or from
 solutions to subscribers' Service Requests.

 The Microsoft OnLine Information Sources contain a great deal of
 information. To assist you in finding the specific information you need,
 Microsoft OnLine uses a text-query method to search the text file
 databases.

 When you enter search words to indicate your area of interest, Microsoft
 OnLine scans every page and title of every item in the database to find a
 match for the search words. If you are searching for a file, Microsoft
 OnLine searches for the filename and any description information.

 After Microsoft OnLine has scanned all the items, it tells you how many
 items meet your search criteria. If Microsoft OnLine finds more than 256
 matches, it displays the message "Too Many Matches -- Please refine the
 search." You may also see a Message Code #103 "A text database search found
 too many matches and overflowed the buffer" if Microsoft OnLine finds
 significantly more than 256 matches. Try narrowing your search criteria to
 reduce the number of matches.

 The Membership Book

 The Membership Book contains public information about other subscribers,
 including names, addresses, Electronic Mail Addresses, phone numbers,
 professional experience, and personal interests. You can download a
 membership form and fill it in to post your own information in the
 Membership Book. For more information, see the section titled "Posting Your
 Information in the Membership Book" in this chapter.

 The Software Library

 The Software Library contains files posted by Microsoft. These files might
 be device drivers, patches, software updates, or general tools and
 utilities. This library contains three types of files:

    ş   ASCII (TXT) files, which can be regular text files or batch files.

    ş   Binary (BIN) files, which can be executable, device driver, or other
        binary files.

    ş   Archived (ARC) files, which are compacted binary files. These
        archived files may contain more than one file.

 The file type is indicated in the title of the item. For example:

    S10052 Word 4.0 P5 Printer Driver [BIN]

    S20030 Turbo Pascal to QuickC Translator Utility [ARC]

    S30050 Windows 2.0 Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) Spec. [TXT]

 When you choose a file to download, you will see additional information
 about the file.

 You will also receive an archive utility program on one of the Microsoft
 OnLine disks. Use this archive utility program to compress and combine files
 for transmission and to break up and extract the information from archived
 files you've received. For more information, see the files PKARC.DOC and
 PKXARC.DOC on the Microsoft OnLine Utilities disk 1 in 5.25-inch format or
 the Program disk 2 in 3.5-inch format.

 The KnowledgeBase

 The KnowledgeBase contains the latest technical information about Microsoft
 products, general service information, and the latest Microsoft press
 releases. All the items in the KnowledgeBase are text. Much of the
 information in the KnowledgeBase comes from Service Requests submitted by
 developers such as yourself and from the Exchange.


 Posting Your Information in the Membership Book

 You can download a membership form from the Membership Book using the
 search words title(mbform). See the sections titled "Using Logical
 Operators" and "Using Other Operators" in this chapter for more
 information.

 When you download the form, fill it in with your name, address, services,
 phone number, professional experience, and personal interests. Then mail the
 completed form to the alias EDITOR. When your information has been
 entered, your listing is available to all Microsoft OnLine subscribers.


 Syntax Rules for Searching the Information Sources

 You can combine words, phrases (which are groups of words separated by
 spaces or grouped by parentheses), and operators freely, but keep these
 basic rules in mind when searching:

    ş   You can type upper- or lower-case letters to enter your search
        criteria. The search criteria are not case-sensitive.

    ş   You can link words together with parentheses to establish
        relationships between the words in your search criteria. When using
        parentheses, you must use both a left and right parenthesis.

    ş   Queries that contain operators must be valid binary expressions with
        two items. For example, not dot matrix printer is not a valid
        search criterion. However, laser printer not dot matrix printer is
        a valid search criteria.

    ş   A single query cannot have more than 25 AND, OR, and NOT operators.

    ş   A phrase cannot be longer than 30 words.

    ş   A query cannot be longer than 200 characters including spaces.

    ş   A query cannot have more than 50 total words, including operators.

    ş   A query cannot begin with the AND, OR, or NOT operators.


 Using Logical Operators

 You can use the logical operators, AND, OR, and NOT to combine search words
 and reduce the number of matches Microsoft OnLine finds for your search
 criteria.

 Using the AND Operator

 If you join words or phrases with AND, Microsoft OnLine looks for items
 that contain both words or phrases. The more words you join with AND, the
 fewer matches Microsoft OnLine will find. For example, you could type disk
 and problem and format and Microsoft OnLine will locate only items that
 contain all three of these words.

 Using the OR Operator

 If you join words or phrases with OR, Microsoft OnLine looks for items that
 contain either words or phrases. Using OR will generate a larger number of
 found items than if you use AND. For example, you could type dot matrix
 printer or laser printer and Microsoft OnLine will locate items that
 contain dot matrix printer or laser printer.

 Using the NOT Operator

 If you join words or phrases with NOT, Microsoft OnLine will exclude items
 that contain the word or phrase following NOT in the search. Use the word
 NOT to eliminate information or when you are uncertain of an exact search
 word. For example, you could type dot matrix printer not laser and
 Microsoft OnLine will locate all items that contain the words dot matrix
 printer, except those that contain the word laser.

 Using Multiple Operators

 You can also use multiple logical operators to narrow down your search. For
 example, windows and graphics not 80386 would find items related to
 Windows and graphics, but would exclude items that contain 80386.


 Getting a Bug or Documentation Error List

 Getting a Bug List

 Use the keyword buglist to retrieve a bug list for a product. You search
 for a bug list using the phrase product and buglistx.xx, where x.xx is the
 version number of the product. For example, if you wanted to find the bug
 list for Word version 3.x, you would enter the search criteria Word and
 buglist3. If you want a bug list for all versions of a product, type
 product and buglist.

 Getting a Documentation Error List

 Use the keyword docerr to retrieve a list of documentation errors for a
 product. You search for a documentation error list using the phrase docerr
 and product and x.xx, where x.xx is the version number of the product.
 For example, to retrieve a documentation error list for Word 4.0, you would
 type the search criteria docerr and Word and 4.0.


 Using Other Operators

 Microsoft OnLine also includes other operators for searching the
 Information Sources. These operators are a range indicator, a suffix-masking
 character, segment title, and segment date operators. You can also combine
 groups of search words with parentheses. You can use these operators in
 addition to the logical operators described above.

 Using Range Indicators

 You use the range indicators to specify the range of words in which search
 terms can appear. Microsoft OnLine has two types of range indicators: range
 and forward-range.

 Range indicates the number of words before or after a term in which another
 word must appear for a match. The default operator is R/. In the search
 phrase printer r/10 laser, the word laser must appear within 10 words
 before or after the word printer for a match.

 Forward-range indicates the maximum number of words after the first word in
 which the next word must appear for a match. The default operator is W/. For
 example, a simple phrase such as laser printer implies a forward range of
 one word because printer must appear within one word after laser to get a
 match. In the search phrase laser w/10 printer, the word printer must
 appear within 10 words after laser for a match.

 Using the Suffix-Masking Operator

 You use the suffix-masking operator * (asterisk) to search for items that
 begin with anything preceding the *. This * operates similarly to the DOS *
 wildcard character. For example, print* finds all items that contain the
 words print, printer, printers, printed, printing, printout, and so on.

 Using the Segment Title Operator

 You use the segment title operator to search only the title segment of the
 item. Currently, there are two segments you can search on: title and date.
 For example, title(windows) finds all items that have Windows in the
 title.

 You can use multiple segment names in a query as long as the segments do
 not overlap. For example, you can use title(windows) and title(dde), but
 you can't use title(windows) and title(windows and dde).

 Using the Segment Date Operator

 You use a segment date operator to search the date segment of an item's
 title. Currently, there are two segments you can search on: title and date.
 The format of the segment date operator is date(xYYMMDD -to- xYYMMDD). The
 x before each of the dates is always required and the -to- with the
 hyphens is required when you specify a range of dates. You can also search
 an item's date segment for a single date.

 For example, date(x871101 -to- x880101) will find items that were added
 to the Information Sources with a date segment between November 1, 1987 and
 January 1, 1988. The phrase date(x880101 -to- x999999) will find all items
 with a date segment between January 1, 1988 and the most current date. The
 phrase date(x880120) will find all items with the date January 20, 1988.

 For example, if you want to find new entries for the C Compiler since you
 last logged onto the Service, you would type C Compiler and date(xYYMMDD -
 to - x999999), where YYMMDD is the date you last checked the Information
 Sources for entries on this topic and 999999 is the most current date.

 You can use multiple segment names in a query as long as the segments do
 not overlap. For example, you can use date(x880101 -to- x880202) and
 date(x880306 -to- x880407), but you can't use date(x880101 -to- x880202)
 and date(x880101 -to- x880303).


 Combining Search Words

 You can group search words together with parentheses and you must use both
 right and left parentheses. For example, Fonts and (Printer or Laser
 Printer) will find items containing fonts and either the word printer
 or the words laser printer. The search words Printers and (Fonts not
 Roman) will provide all items about printer fonts, except for Roman fonts.

 You can also use the parentheses to indicate the order in which the
 operators should be evaluated. For example, (modal or modeless) and (dialog
 box not list box) will find all items that contain either modal or modeless
 dialog box items, but exclude items containing list box.


 Excluding Press Releases

 If you don't want to retrieve press releases for products when you search
 for information, include the phrase not title(PR) in your query. For
 example, if you're looking for information on Windows Excel and DDE, but you
 want exclude press releases, you can type (windows excel and dde) not
 title(PR).


 Displaying a List of Topics

 You can display information about general topics in the KnowledgeBase.

 ÜÜÜ  To display a list of topics

    1.  Display the Search dialog box.

    2.  Choose TOPICS on the menu and press ENTER.

        To remove the list, press ESC.


 Displaying Search Hints

 You can display tips on how to find what you need in the Microsoft OnLine
 Information Sources.

 ÜÜÜ  To display Search Hints

    1.  Display the Search dialog box.

    2.  Choose SEARCH-HINTS on the menu and press ENTER.

        To remove the Search Hints, press ESC.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 TIP
   When you display the Search Hints, you should download them to a file or
   print them on a printer. See the section titled "Downloading Items from
   the Information Sources" in this chapter for information.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Searching the Information Sources

 ÜÜÜ  To begin searching for a topic

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the icon for the Information Source you
        want and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Search dialog box.

    2.  Type your search words and logical operators. See the section titled
        "Using Logical Operators" in this chapter for information.

    3.  Choose BEGIN-SEARCH from the menu.

 Microsoft OnLine begins searching for items that match your search criteria
 and then displays the number of items it found for that match. If there are
 more than 256 matches for your search criteria, Microsoft OnLine displays
 the message "Too Many Matches -- Please refine the search." You may also see
 a Message Code #103 "A text database search found too many matches and
 overflowed the buffer" if Microsoft OnLine finds significantly more than 256
 matches. Narrow your search criteria and choose BEGIN-SEARCH again from the
 menu.

 Displaying Titles of Matching Items

 After you've established the search criteria and chosen BEGIN-SEARCH, you
 can display a list of the items that match your criteria.

 ÜÜÜ  To display titles of items that match your criteria

    ş   Choose DISPLAY-TITLES from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a list of titles that match your search
        criteria.

 Opening an Item

 Once you've displayed a list of titles that match your search criteria, you
 can display the text item and read it. If the item you selected from the
 list is a file, Microsoft OnLine displays the Receive dialog box, which
 provides descriptive information.

 ÜÜÜ  To open an item

    1.  Press a direction key to move the <- to the item you want to open and
        then press ENTER.

        If the item is a text item, Microsoft OnLine displays the text for
        the item you selected. If the item occupies more than one screen,
        wait until the entire item has been displayed on the screen before
        you press any keys. However, you can press ESC to stop the
        listing.

        If the item is a file, Microsoft OnLine displays the Receive dialog
        box, which gives you information about the file.

    2.  Once your text item is displayed, use the direction keys to scroll
        through the item.

        If you want to save the item to a disk file or print it on your
        printer, see the section that follows titled "Downloading Items from
        the Information Sources."

    3.  To close the item, press ESC.


 Downloading Items from the Information Sources

 Once you've entered your search criteria, displayed a list of items that
 match the criteria, and opened the item, you can download the item to your
 disk or print it on your printer.

 Saving Text Items to Disk

 There are two methods for saving text items to disk. Use Method 1 when the
 item is displayed. Use Method 2 when a list of items is displayed.

 ÜÜÜ  To download a text item and save it to a disk file

 Method 1: when the item is displayed

    1. Press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose SAVE-ON-DISK from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Save In dialog box.

    3.  Type the filename in which you want to save the text item and press
        ENTER.

 Method 2: from a list of items

    1.  For each item you want to retrieve, move the <- to the item and press
        the + key to mark the item.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose OUTPUT from the menu.

    4.  Choose RECEIVE-FILE.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Save In dialog box.

    5.  Type the filename in which you want to save the file and press
        ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine will place all the marked items in the same receive
        file.

 Printing Text Items

 There are two methods for printing text items. Use Method 1 when the item
 is displayed. Use Method 2 when a list of items is displayed.

 ÜÜÜ  To download a text item and print it

 Method 1: when the item is displayed

    1.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose PRINT from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine prints the item on your printer.

 Method 2: from a list of items

    1.  For each item you want to print, move the <- to the item and press
        the + key to mark the item.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose OUTPUT from the menu.

    4.  Choose PRINTER.

        Microsoft OnLine prints all the marked items on your printer.

 Saving File Items to Disk

 ÜÜÜ  To download a file item and save it to disk

    1.  For each item you want to download, move the <- to the item and press
        the + key to mark the item. If you choose more than one item, all the
        items will be downloaded to the same file.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose OUTPUT from the menu.

    4.  Choose RECEIVE-FILE.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Save In dialog box.

    5.  Type the filename in which you want to save the item(s).

    6.  Choose YES.

        Microsoft OnLine will place all the marked items in the same receive
        file.

 When the transfer is complete, the file is available for use from your disk
 with the name you specified.

 Downloading Items to Your Local In Basket

 Once you've found the information you want, you can add the information to
 your Local In Basket, which you can open both when not connected to the
 Service or when connected from the Service. Then the information will be
 available for messages and for storing in your Local Filing Cabinet.

 For information about storing the item in your Local Filing Cabinet, see
 the section titled "Managing Your Local Filing Cabinet" in Chapter 6,
 "Using Electronic Mail."

 Use method 1 if you have only one item to add to your Local In Basket. Use
 method 2 if you have more than one item.

 ÜÜÜ  To download items to your Local In Basket

 Method 1: for one item

    1.  Search the Information Sources to find the item you want.

    2.  Display the item by positioning the <- to the right of the item and
        pressing ENTER.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose ADD-TO-LOCAL.

        Microsoft OnLine adds the item to your Local In Basket.

 Method 2: for more than one item

    1.  Search the Information Sources to find the list of items you want.

    2.  Select each item you want by pressing the + key when the <- is to the
        right of the item. If you want to receive all the items in the list,
        you don't need to mark them with the + key.

        If you accidentally mark an item you don't want to download, move the
        <- to that item and press the - key.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose GET-ITEMS.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Get Items dialog box. Use this dialog
        box to tell Microsoft OnLine what items and what type of items to
        get, and to select other options.

    5.  Select GET ALL or GET SELECTED. GET ALL retrieves all the items in
        the displayed list. GET SELECTED retrieves only the items that you've
        marked with the + key.

    6.  Select GET FILES, GET DOCUMENTS, or GET BOTH. GET FILES retrieves
        only file items. GET DOCUMENTS retrieves only text items. GET BOTH
        retrieves both file and text items.

    7.  Select STAY-CONNECTED or DISCONNECT either to stay connected to the
        Service or to disconnect from the Service after the items are
        retrieved.

    8.  Select SAVE-LOCALLY or DISPLAY-ONLY either to save the items in your
        Local In Basket or just to display the items.

    9.  Select PRINT YES or NO. YES prints the items as they are received. NO
        doesn't print the items.

   10.  Choose YES to retrieve the items. Choose NO to cancel retrieving the
        items.


 Creating a Message with Information from the KnowledgeBase

 If you are searching through the KnowledgeBase and you find something that
 you want to send to someone else in an Electronic Mail Message, you can
 create this message without leaving the KnowledgeBase. You can create
 messages only from text items.

 If you want to send a copy of a file on the Service to someone, you need to
 download the file to your microcomputer first, then upload it to the
 recipient.

 For information about downloading a file, see the section titled
 "Downloading Items from the Information Sources" in this chapter.

 For information about uploading a file to another subscriber, see the
 section titled "Uploading a File to Another Subscriber" in Chapter 6,
 "Using Electronic Mail."

 Creating a Message

 ÜÜÜ  To create a message with information from the KnowledgeBase

    1.  Display the text item from the KnowledgeBase from which you want to
        copy a block to paste into your message.

    2.  Mark the block of text you want to copy by pressing the + key both at
        the beginning and the end of the block of text you want to copy.

    3.  Press ESC to exit the item.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose EDIT.

    6.  Choose NEW.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a blank screen.

    7.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    8.  Choose PASTE.

 Microsoft OnLine pastes the information you selected into your new item.

 Saving a Message

 ÜÜÜ  To save your message to disk

    1.  Press ESC.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Save As dialog box.

    2.  Type the filename.

    3.  Choose SAVE.

 Addressing and Sending a Message

 After you have copied the item into your message and edited it as
 necessary, you can address the message and send it. You must have the
 message displayed to send it. To display the message, choose EDIT from the
 menu and then choose OPEN to open an existing message. Then follow this
 procedure to send the message.

 ÜÜÜ  To address and send the message

    1.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose SEND.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Send dialog box.

    3.  If you don't remember the address(es), put a ? in the Send TO or CC
        line, then press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays your Local Address Book. Mark the
        address(es) you want to copy by pressing the + key on the numeric
        keypad for each address you want to copy to the Address dialog box.
        Then press ENTER. Microsoft OnLine pastes these addresses to your
        Address dialog box.

        If the address(es) is in the Host Address Book, you can copy it from
        there to your Local Address Book. See the section titled "Searching
        the Service Address Book for an Address" in Chapter 6, "Using
        Electronic Mail," for more information.

    4.  If you want to copy the message to other people in addition the
        recipient(s) listed at the beginning, press the UP or DOWN key to
        select the CC line and enter the address for the recipient(s).

    5.  After you've addressed your message, press the DOWN key to move the
        highlight to the Subject line.

    6.  Type the subject for your message on the Subject line and press
        ENTER.

    7.  If you want to drop the message in the Out Basket, select DROP-IN-
        OUTBASKET from the menu. You can then transmit the message with other
        messages as a group.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a message telling you that it is placing
        your message in the Out Basket and then displays your message text
        again.

    8.  To close your message, choose CLOSE from the menu.


 Chapter 5.  Creating and Sending Service Requests
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter describes how to:

    ş   Prioritize your Service Requests.

    ş   Create a Service Request and send it to Microsoft.

    ş   Receive a Service Response.

    ş   Send a supplemental Service Request.

    ş   Print, view, and delete a Service Request.

 Although the information in the Microsoft KnowledgeBase and Libraries is
 up-to-date and extensive, you may need to request specific information. To
 request more specific information, you use Microsoft OnLine to create and
 then send a Service Request to Microsoft. Microsoft will respond to your
 Service Request with a Service Response that you receive via Microsoft
 OnLine. After you've received the Service Response, you can view it, print
 it, or save it to a disk file.


 Overview

 You must be disconnected from the Service to create a Service Request.
 Creating a Service Requests consists of filling in a Service Request Entry
 Form, writing a Description file, and including an Attachment file that must
 be archived.

 The Service Request Entry Form contains background information about you,
 your equipment, the product you are inquiring about, and the type and
 priority of your request.

 The required Description file describes the subject of your Service Request
 in detail. You can use your favorite text editor or the Microsoft OnLine
 editor to create your Description file. You can start your editor from DOS,
 from the Shell to DOS Icon, from the Service Request Mgr menu, or from a
 customized icon on the Main Screen. Which method you use to start your
 editor depends on available memory and personal preference.

 The Attachment file must be archived. Or, if you want to attach more than
 one file, you must also archive these files. You might include the
 Attachment file if, for example, you wanted to send source codes files with
 your Service Request about a compiler.

 Once you've created the Service Request, you connect to the Service, select
 the Service Request Xfer Icon on the Main Screen, and Microsoft OnLine
 automatically transmits all unsent requests to Microsoft.

 Microsoft OnLine will notify you with a message in your In Basket when you
 have Service Responses queued to be downloaded to your microcomputer. To
 receive the Service Responses, you connect to the Service, select the
 Service Request Xfer Icon, and Microsoft OnLine automatically downloads the
 responses. You can then print, view, or delete the Service Response or save
 it to disk.


 About ROP Files

 Before you can create a Service Request, you must have the ROP (Reference
 Operating System Product) files ROP.DAT, ROP.IDX, and ROP.FIL on your
 hard disk in the same subdirectory as the Microsoft OnLine program files.
 The ROP files contain lists of Microsoft products and version numbers
 organized by product families. These files are used when you create a
 Service Request Header to fill in product information.

 If you see the message "ROP file missing: Please invoke Service Request
 Xfer Icon" when you select the Service Request Manager Icon, connect to the
 Service, select the Service Request Xfer Icon, and the Service will
 automatically download the appropriate ROP files.


 For Information about Your Service Request Status

 If you want to inquire about the status of your Service Request, send
 Electronic Mail to the alias SR-STATUS. You should inquire about the
 status of your Service Request only if you haven't received an
 acknowledgement to your request within 24 hours or if there has been a long
 period of time since the last response from Microsoft.


 About Service Request Priorities

 The priority you enter on the Service Request Header determines what type
 of response Microsoft will give your Service Request. The priorities range
 from A, which represents a critical need, to F, which means no response is
 necessary.

 Don't make all your Service Requests Priority A because the System will
 become overloaded with critical requests. Review the priorities below and
 select the one that best matches your situation.

 Priority A - Critical

 Priority A means that your work has come to a complete stop or a delivery
 date is severely impacted. You need technical assistance immediately in
 order to continue your work.

 Microsoft will respond to Priority A Service Requests with a priority call
 back within one business day unless an answer can be provided within that
 time.

 Priority B - Urgent

 Priority B means that your work has slowed down because you need technical
 assistance. For example, you might have found a temporary solution, but you
 need assistance to find a permanent solution.

 Priority C - Important

 Priority C means that your work has not stopped or slowed down, but may do
 so soon without Microsoft support.

 Priority D - Needed

 Priority D is similar to Priority C, except that when you choose Priority D
 the Service Request will be responded to less quickly. For example, you
 might anticipate a need for technical assistance for a future project and
 give it Priority D.

 Priority E - Interesting

 Use Priority E for questions or issues that you want to pass on to
 Microsoft as a point of interest and for which you want a response.

 Priority F - No response is necessary

 Use Priority F for any Service Request that requires no response from
 Microsoft. For example, use Priority F for product suggestions.


 About Service Responses

 When you send a Service Request, you will receive an acknowledgement
 that Microsoft has received your Service Request. You will also receive a
 Service Response that answers your request for information.


 Creating a Service Request

 The Service Request contains a header, an attached Description file, and an
 optional Attachment file that you must archive.

 The Service Request Header contains background information about you, your
 equipment, the product you are inquiring about, the type of request, and the
 priority of your request.

 The Description file is a required file and describes the subject of your
 Service Request in detail. You use your editor to create a Description file,
 then enter the name of the Description file on the Service Request Entry
 Form, and Microsoft OnLine automatically sends this file with the Service
 Request Header when you send the Service Request to Microsoft.

 You can use your favorite editor or the Microsoft OnLine editor to create
 the Description file. You can start the editor you use to create the
 Description file from DOS, from the Shell to DOS Icon, from within the
 Service Request Mgr Icon, or from a customized icon on the Microsoft OnLine
 Main Screen. Which method you use to start your editor depends on available
 memory and personal preference.

 If you want to start your editor from within the Service Request Mgr Icon
 by selecting an item from the menu, you must include the full DOS path to
 your editor in the ONLINE.INI file. See Chapter 2, "Installing Microsoft
 OnLine," for information. If you are connected to the Service and have
 selected the Service Request Mgr Icon, start your editor from the menu, and
 then are disconnected from the Service, it's because you don't have enough
 memory in your microcomputer.

 If you want to start your editor from an icon on the Main Screen, you can
 customize the BT50.ZIF file. Note that you must have enough available memory
 to run both Microsoft OnLine and your editor simultaneously if you choose to
 run the editor as a spawned application. However, if you choose to run your
 editor as a chained application, you do not need as much memory, but
 performance will be decreased. You can set up your editor to run as a
 spawned or chained application by customizing the BT50.ZIF file.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   You can also run the Service Request Manager as a spawned or chained
   application. If you run the Service Request Manager as a spawned
   application you can be connected to the Service and create your Service
   Request. However, if there has been no transmission activity for ten
   minutes, Microsoft OnLine will automatically disconnect you. In contrast,
   if you run the Service Request Manager as a chained application, you will
   be automatically disconnected from the Service when you select the Service
   Request Mgr Icon.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 For more information on customizing the BT50.ZIF file, see Appendix C,
 "Customizing Microsoft OnLine."

 The optional Attachment file must be archived. If you want to include more
 than one Attachment file to your Service Request, you must archive the files
 because you can transmit only one Attachment file with your Service
 Request.

 Moving Around the Service Request Entry Form

 You use the direction keys to move around on the Service Request Entry
 Form. Press LEFT or RIGHT to move the cursor left or right on a line.
 Press DOWN or TAB to move the highlight to the next line. Press UP or
 SHIFT+TAB to move the highlight to the previous line.

 Creating a Service Request Header

 ÜÜÜ  To create a Service Request Header

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press
        ENTER. If you are connected to the Service, you will be
        disconnected. Because you are billed for all time you are connected
        to the Service, disconnecting from the Service automatically can
        lower your costs.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose CREATE on the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Service Request Entry Form.

        The First Name, Last Name, Phone, and RefCon (Reference
        Configuration) lines are filled in based on the information you
        placed in the ONLINE.INI file. You can also edit these fields when
        the Service Request Entry Form is displayed.

        ş The First Name line can have a maximum of 15 characters
          (including spaces).

        ş The Last Name line can have a maximum of 20 characters
          (including spaces).

        ş The Phone line can have a maximum of 21 characters (including
          spaces).

        ş The Ref Con line can have a maximum of 65 characters
          (including spaces).

        When you position the highlight on the Product Family, Operating
        System, Product, Type of Request, or Priority lines, Microsoft OnLine
        displays a list of selections for that topic.

        If Microsoft OnLine doesn't display a list for these lines, press
        F2 to display the list. Once the list is displayed, use the UP
        and DOWN keys to select the item you want, then press ENTER. You
        can also press the first letter of the item in the list you want. If
        the list has more than one item that begins with the same letter and
        you press that letter, you will select the first item in the list
        that starts with that letter.

    4.  Move the highlight with the direction keys to the Product Family
        line. If the line is blank, Microsoft OnLine displays a list of
        product families. Otherwise, press F2 to see a list of available
        product families. Select the Product Family you want and press
        ENTER.

    5.  Press the direction keys to move to the Operating System line. Press
        F2 to see a list of operating systems. Select the operating system
        and press ENTER.

    6.  Press the direction keys to move to the Operating System Version
        line. Type up to 5 characters for the Operating System Version Number
        and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine will use this Operating System Version Number for
        all subsequent Service Requests that reference the same operating
        system.

    7.  Press the direction keys to move to the Product line and press F2
        to see a list of products in the product family you chose. Select the
        product you want and press ENTER.

    8.  Press the direction keys to move to the Prod Version line, type the
        product version you have, and press ENTER.

    9.  Press the direction keys to move to the Type of Request line and
        press F2 to see a list of types of requests. Select the type of
        request you have and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine abbreviates the type of request on the dialog box:
        DO for documentation, IN for information, OT for other, PR for
        problem report, and SU for suggestion.

   10.  Press the direction keys to move to the Priority line and press F2
        to see a list of priorities. Select the priority of your Service
        Request and press ENTER.

        For information about the priorities, see the section titled "About
        Service Request Priorities" near the beginning of this chapter.

   11.  Type a subject for your Service Request and press ENTER. You can
        type up to 65 characters (including spaces).

   12.  Type the path (optional) and filename for your Description file on
        the Description Filename line and press ENTER. You can type up to
        63 characters (including spaces).

        If Microsoft OnLine can't find the file, it displays "File name does
        not exist. Press any key to continue." Press any key to remove this
        message and then correct the filename.

   13.  Type the full path and filename for the Attachment Filename line for
        your file and press ENTER. You can type up to 63 characters
        (including spaces).

   14.  Choose YES at the bottom of the Service Request Entry Form to save
        your Service Request. Choose NO to not save your Service Request.

 Creating a Description File

 You can start your editor from within the Service Request Mgr module or, if
 you've customized the BT50.ZIF file, from an icon on the Main Screen. In
 either case, be sure that you or your editor ends each line at 78 characters
 with the CR LF (Carriage Return, Line Feed) pair. Otherwise, when Microsoft
 OnLine transmits the message, it will transmit paragraphs as single long
 lines that are truncated at 80 characters.

 In addition, don't embed control or extended characters in the Description
 file. When you save the file with your editor's Save command, be sure you
 save the file as unformatted (ASCII). You can, however, use the Tab and Form
 Feed characters when creating your Description file.

 In order to start your editor from within the Service Request Mgr module,
 you must enter the full path name and other information for your editor in
 the ONLINE.INI file. See Chapter 2, "Installing Microsoft OnLine," for
 information.

 For information about modifying the BT50.ZIF file, see Appendix C,
 "Customizing Microsoft OnLine."

 This procedure assumes that you will start the editor from within the
 Service Request Mgr module and that the ONLINE.INI file contains the
 information needed to start your editor.

 ÜÜÜ  To create a Description file

    1.  Select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose EDITOR from the menu.

    4.  Use your usual commands to enter and edit text. Don't embed any
        control or extended characters in the file.

    5.  When you are done entering and editing the description, save the file
        as an unformatted (ASCII) file with the editor's Save command. Then
        exit the editor.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Service Request List again.

    6.  If the menu isn't displayed, press F1 to display it.

    7.  If you're creating a new Service Request, choose CREATE from the
        menu.

        If you're editing an existing service request, move the <- to the
        Service Request you want and choose UPDATE from the menu.

        In either case, Microsoft OnLine displays the Service Request Entry
        Form.

    8.  Type the filename for your Description file on the Description
        Filename line and press ENTER. See the following section titled
        "Attaching a Description File" for more information.

 Attaching a Description File

 ÜÜÜ  To attach a Description file to your Service Request

    1.  Select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  If you're creating a new Service Request, choose CREATE from the
        menu.

        If you're editing an existing Service Request, move the <- to the
        Service Request you want and choose UPDATE from the menu.

        In either case, Microsoft OnLine displays the Service Request Entry
        Form.

    4.  Type the filename for your Description file on the Description
        Filename line and press ENTER.

        If the file is in a subdirectory other than the one where the
        Microsoft OnLine files reside, you also need to include the full path
        name on the Description Filename line.

        If Microsoft OnLine can't find the file, it displays "Filename does
        not exist. Press any key to continue." Press any key to remove this
        message and then correct the filename.

 Including an Attachment File

 ÜÜÜ  To include an Attachment file to your Service Request (optional)

    1.  Select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  If you're creating a new Service Request, choose CREATE from the
        menu.

        If you're editing an existing service request, move the <- to the
        Service Request you want and choose UPDATE from the menu.

        In either case, Microsoft OnLine displays the Service Request Entry
        Form.

    4.  Use the direction keys to move the highlight to the Attachment
        Filename line on the Service Request Entry Form.

    5.  Type the filename for your file on the Attachment Filename line and
        press ENTER.

        If the file is in a subdirectory other than the one where the
        Microsoft OnLine files reside, you also need to include the full path
        name on the Attachment Filename line.

 Creating a Supplemental Service Request

 When you receive a response to a Service Request, you may need to send more
 information to Microsoft. To do this, you create a supplemental Service
 Request that references the Service Request Reference ID Number received on
 the initial response to your Service Request. You can see this number on
 either the Service Response List, which you display by choosing RESPONSES
 from the menu, or on the Service Request List.

 This number is 15-characters long and has the form SRXYYMMDD(nnnnnnn).

    SR       Indicates a Service Request.

    X        Is a letter that must be capitalized on the
             Supplemental Service Request Header.

    YYMMDD   Is the date.

    nnnnnnn  Is a Sequence Number.

 ÜÜÜ  To create a Supplemental Service Request

    1.  Select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose CREATE from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Service Request Entry Form.

    4.  Type the Service Request Reference ID Number from the response on the
        Service Request ID line.

        You can also press F2 to display a list of numbers. When this list
        is displayed, press the UP or DOWN keys to select the number you
        want and press ENTER.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   Make certain that you capitalize the third character in the Service
   Request Reference ID Number when you type this number for a Supplemental
   Service Request.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

    5.  Fill in the rest of the Service Request Entry Form as appropriate.
        For instructions on filling in this form, see the section titled
        "Creating a Service Request Header" in this chapter.

    6.  Choose YES or NO at the bottom of the Service Request Entry Form.

        YES saves your Service Request; NO does not save your Service
        Request.

    7.  Send the supplemental Service Request to Microsoft by connecting to
        the Service and selecting the Service Request Xfer Icon.


 Updating a Service Request Header

 Once you've created your Service Request Header, you can update it.
 However, you can update only Service Requests with the status Unsent or
 Held.

 ÜÜÜ  To update a Service Request Header

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Service Request Mgr and press
        ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a list of Service Requests.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose UPDATE from the menu.

    4.  Choose the Service Request you want to update by pointing the <- to
        the request and pressing ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Service Request Entry Form.

    5.  Make any changes you want to your Service Request Header. For
        information about what you enter for each line, see the section
        titled "Creating a Service Request Header" in this chapter.

 Editing a Description File

 ÜÜÜ  To edit a Description file

    1.  Open the Description file with your editor.

    2.  Make changes to the Description file.

    3.  Save the description with the editor's Save command. Then exit the
        editor.


 Sending a Service Request

 Once you've filled out the Service Request Header and included a
 Description file and an optional Attachment file that is archived, you can
 send the Service Request to Microsoft. When you select the Service Request
 Xfer Icon, Microsoft OnLine automatically sends all Service Requests that
 have the status Unsent to Microsoft.

 If you don't want to send a Service Request that has the status Unsent, you
 can change the status to Held. See the section titled "About Service Request
 Statuses" in this chapter for information.

 ÜÜÜ  To send all Service Requests with the status Unsent

    1.  Make certain you are connected to the Service.

    2.  Select the Service Request Xfer Icon and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine will transmit all Unsent Service Requests to
        Microsoft.


 Receiving a Service Response

 Once you've sent in a Service Request, Microsoft will send a response to
 you. This response contains the Service Request Reference ID Number, which
 you use for any Supplemental Service Requests or correspondence.

 When there is response waiting for you, this message will appear in your In
 Basket: "Response for Service Request #nnn has been queued for you to
 receive." If there is an attached file included with your Service Response,
 you also see the message, "Attachment File is included (approx. nnnnn
 bytes)."

 ÜÜÜ  To receive a Service Response

    1.  Make certain you are connected to the Service.

    2.  Select the Service Request Xfer Icon and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine will download all responses waiting for you.

        Now you can view the Service Response. See the following section
        titled "Viewing a Service Request or Response."


 Viewing a Service Request or Response

 After you've created your Service Request, you can look at it before you
 send it. In addition, after you've sent your Service Request to Microsoft,
 you can view the response to your request. To view the Service Request or
 response, you must be disconnected from the Service.

 Viewing a Service Request

 ÜÜÜ  To view a Service Request

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press
        ENTER.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose UPDATE.

    3.  Mark the Service Request you want to view by moving the <- to the
        right of the Service Request and pressing ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Service Request Entry Form for the
        Service Request you chose.

 Viewing a Service Response

 Once you've received a response to your Service Request, you can view it.
 Although you need to be connected to the Service to receive a response, you
 must be disconnected from the Service to view the response. For information
 about receiving a response, see the section titled "Receiving a Service
 Response" in this chapter.

 The Service Response you receive from Microsoft includes a Service Request
 Reference ID Number. Use this number if you send a Supplemental Service
 Request to Microsoft. For more information, see the section titled "Creating
 a Supplemental Service Request" in this chapter.

 ÜÜÜ  To view a Service Response

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press
        ENTER.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose RESPONSES from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a list of responses you've received from
        the Service. This list includes the Response filename, the Service
        Request Reference ID Number, the date, and the Attachment file
        filename.

    4.  Select the Service Response you want by moving the <- to the right of
        the response and pressing ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Service Response you chose.


 Printing a Service Request or Response

 You can print a Service Request on your printer or to a file by editing the
 ONLINE.INI File.

 Printing a Service Request

 ÜÜÜ  To print a Service Request

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press
        ENTER.

    2.  Mark the Service Request(s) that you want to print by pressing the +
        key when the <- is to the right of the Service Request(s).

        If you accidentally press the + key for the wrong Service Request,
        press the - key to remove the highlight.

        You can also press the INSERT key to select all unselected Service
        Requests and deselect all selected Service Requests. All selected
        Service Requests print when you choose PRINT from the menu.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose PRINT from the menu.

 Printing a Service Response

 You can print a Service Response on your printer or to a file by editing
 the ONLINE.INI File.

 ÜÜÜ  To print a Service Response

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press
        ENTER.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose RESPONSES from the menu.

    4.  Mark the Service Response(s) that you want to print by pressing the +
        key when the <- is to the right of the responses.

        If you accidentally press the + key for the wrong response, press the
        - key to remove the highlight.

        You can also press the INSERT key to select all unselected Service
        Responses and deselect all selected Service Response. All selected
        Service Responses will print when you choose PRINT from the menu.

    5.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    6.  Choose PRINT from the menu.


 Deleting a Service Request or Response

 Deleting a Service Request

 You can delete a Service Request at any time; however, if you delete a
 request before you send it, you can't send it. You can, however, delete a
 Service Request after you have sent it to Microsoft and you will still
 receive a Service Response for that deleted request. To delete a Service
 Request, you must be disconnected from the Service.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   Deleting a Service request also deletes the Description file referenced on
   the Service Request Entry Form. However, Microsoft OnLine does not delete
   the Attachment file when you delete a Service Request.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 ÜÜÜ  To delete a Service Request

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press
        ENTER.

    2.  Mark the Service Request(s) that you want to delete by pressing the +
        key when the <- is to the right of the Service Request(s).

        If you accidentally press the + key for the wrong Service Request,
        press the - key to remove the highlight.

        You can also press the INSERT key to select all unselected Service
        Requests and deselect all selected Service Requests. All selected
        Service Requests are deleted when you choose DELETE from the menu.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose DELETE from the menu.

 Deleting a Service Response

 ÜÜÜ  To delete a Service Response

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press
        ENTER.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose RESPONSES from the menu.

    4.  Mark the Service Response(s) that you want to delete by pressing the
        + key when the <- is to the right of the response(s).

        If you accidentally press the + key for the wrong response, press the
        - key to remove the highlight.

        You can also press the INSERT key to select all unselected Service
        Responses and deselect all selected Service Response. All selected
        Service Responses are deleted when you choose DELETE from the menu.

    5.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    6.  Choose DELETE from the menu.


 About Service Request Statuses

 Each Service Request can have one of three statuses: Unsent, Held, or Sent.
 You can also change the status of a Service Request from Unsent to Held.
 When you change the status to Held, that Service Request won't be
 transmitted to Microsoft when you select the Service Request Xfer Icon.

     Status                 Meaning

     Unsent                 You have created the Service Request, but you
                            haven't sent it to Microsoft yet

     Held                   You have created the Service Request and it
                            hasn't been sent to Microsoft yet, but you
                            changed the status to Held so it wouldn't be
                            sent to Microsoft when you connect to the
                            Service

     Sent                   You have sent the completed Service Request to
                            Microsoft

 Changing Service Request Status

 ÜÜÜ  To change the status of a Service Request

    1.  Select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Mark the Service Request(s) for which you want to change the status
        by pressing the + key when the <- is to the right of the Service
        Request(s).

        If you accidentally press the + key for the wrong Service Request,
        press the - key to remove the highlight.

        You can also press the INSERT key to select all unselected Service
        Requests and deselect all selected Service Requests.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose STATUS from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine toggles the status of all marked Service Requests
        from Unsent to Held or Held to Unsent.


 Chapter 6.  Using Electronic Mail
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter describes how to:

    ş   Cut costs when using Microsoft OnLine.

    ş   Create and address Electronic Mail Messages.

    ş   Send a file addressed as a message.

    ş   Send and receive Electronic Mail Messages.

    ş   Print an Electronic Mail Message on your printer.

    ş   Save an Electronic Mail Message in a file.

    ş   Create and work with your Local Address Book.

    ş   Manage items in your Local Filing Cabinet.


 For More Information about Microsoft OnLine

 If you need specific information that you can't find in the Information
 Sources, the Exchange, or this User's Guide, Microsoft OnLine has several
 Electronic Mail Aliases and two phone numbers you can use. These aliases and
 phone numbers are described in Chapter 1, "Before You Begin," in the section
 titled "For More Information."


 Cutting Costs Using Microsoft OnLine

 Because you are billed for the time you are connected to the Service, you
 should do as much work as possible while disconnected from the Service. You
 should create, edit, and address your Electronic Mail Messages when you are
 disconnected and then connect to the Service only when you're ready to send
 the messages.


 About the Address Books

 Because you might send messages to the same addresses frequently, Microsoft
 OnLine includes a Local Address Book that you can set up to include your
 most frequently used addresses.

 Microsoft OnLine has two address books: the Local Address Book and the
 Service Address Book. The Local Address Book is your personal address book
 that stores addresses you use frequently. You use the Service Address Book
 when you are connected to the Service to find the address of another
 subscriber.


 About the Out Baskets

 Microsoft OnLine has an Out Basket to store messages you create until you
 are ready to connect to the Service and transmit your messages. Microsoft
 OnLine displays three upward pointing arrows in the Out Basket Icon on the
 Main Screen when messages are queued to be sent.

 You have two Out Baskets: a Local Out Basket, which you access when
 disconnected from the Service; and a Service Out Basket, which you access
 when connected to the Service.

 The Local Out Basket contains messages you've put there to transmit to
 other subscribers.

 The Service Out Basket likewise contains messages you've put there to
 transmit to other subscribers. In addition, it maintains a list of Quik-Comm
 Messages Already Sent; this list contains copies of the messages you've
 already transmitted.


 About the In Baskets

 Microsoft OnLine stores messages you receive from other subscribers in the
 In Basket. Microsoft OnLine displays three downward pointing arrows in the
 In Basket Icon on the Main Screen when there are messages waiting for you to
 read.

 You have two In Baskets: a Local In Basket, which you access when
 disconnected from the Service; and a Service In Basket, which you access
 when connected to the Service. When you are connected to the Service, the
 Local In Basket becomes a list in the Service In Basket labeled the Local
 Filing Cabinet.

 The Local In Basket contains messages you've received from other
 subscribers and the Local Filing Cabinet.

 The Service In Basket also contains messages you've received from other
 subscribers as well as several lists: a Quik-Comm Already Read List, which
 contains messages you've already read; a Local Mail Already Read List, which
 also contains messages you've already read; and the Local Filing Cabinet.

 Both the Service and Local In Baskets contain a list titled Local Filing
 Cabinet.You use the Local Filing Cabinet to store items in a hierarchy that
 you create. For example, you might create a list to store all items related
 to your current project, a list for future projects, and a list for
 miscellaneous messages. For information about managing the information in
 your Local Filing Cabinet, see the section at the end of this chapter titled
 "Managing Your Local Filing Cabinet."


 Using the Keyboard  with Electronic Mail

 Both the Local Address Book and Electronic Mail have some word processing
 features to assist you in creating your addresses and messages.

 You use the direction keys to move the highlight when creating or editing a
 message or your Local Address Book. You move the highlight with the
 following keys:

 Moving the Highlight

      To Move the Highlight                      Press

      To the beginning of the current line       HOME

      To the end of the current line             END

      To the first character in the document     CTRL+HOME

      To the last character in the document      CTRL+END

      One tab setting to the right               TAB

      One tab setting to the left                SHIFT+TAB

      Up one line                                UP

      Down one line                              DOWN

      Left one character                         LEFT

      Right one character                        RIGHT

      Up one page                                PAGE UP

      Down one page                              PAGE DOWN

 Deleting Characters

      To Delete this Character                   Press

      The character at the highlight             DEL

      The character immediately to the left      BACKSPACE
      of the highlight

      To delete to the end of a line             CTRL+D

 Inserting Characters

 ÜÜÜ  To insert characters

    ş   Press the INSERT key.

 To switch between insert and overtype, press the INSERT key. When using
 insert, Microsoft OnLine inserts the characters you type to the left of the
 current highlight position. When using overtype, characters you type
 overwrite those on the screen. The Microsoft OnLine editor defaults to
 overtype mode.

 Starting a New Line

 ÜÜÜ  To start a new line

    ş   Press ENTER.

 Using Wordwrap

 ÜÜÜ  To turn wordwrap either on and off

    ş   Press CTRL+W.

 Wordwrap starts a new line automatically when the highlight reaches the end
 of the line. However, Microsoft OnLine will not break a word so that part of
 the word is on one line and the other part is on the following line.

 Marking a Block

 Before you can copy, erase, or move a block of text, you need to mark it.

 ÜÜÜ  To mark a block

    1.  Position the highlight at the beginning of the block.

    2.  Press the + key on the numeric keypad to mark the beginning of the
        block.

    3.  Move the highlight to the end of the block.

    4.  Press the + key on the numeric keypad to mark the end of the block.

 Removing a Block Marker

 ÜÜÜ  To remove a block marker

    1.  Make certain that the block has been marked.

    2.  Press the - key on the numeric keypad.

 Copying a Block

 Once you've marked a block, you can copy it to another location in your
 message. You can also copy a block from your message to your Local Address
 Book or to another message.

 ÜÜÜ  To copy a block to another location in the same message

    1.  Mark the block.

    2.  Move the highlight to where you want to copy the block.

    3.  Press CTRL+C.

 You can also use the following method to copy a block from your message to
 your Local Address Book or to another message.

 ÜÜÜ  To copy a block to another message

    1.  Mark the block.

    2.  Press ESC to close the message.

    3.  Open the message into which you want to copy the bock or open the
        Local Address Book.

    4.  Move the highlight to the insertion point.

    5.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    6.  Choose PASTE.

    7.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    8.  Choose SAVE.

    9.  Type the filename and press ENTER.

 Deleting a Block

 Once you've marked a block, you can delete it.

 ÜÜÜ  To delete a block

    1.  Mark the block.

    2.  Press CTRL+D.

 Moving a Block

 Once you've marked a block, you can move it to another location in the
 Local Address Book or in your message.

 ÜÜÜ  To move a block

    1.  Mark the block.

    2.  Move the highlight to where you want to move the block.

    3.  Press CTRL+M.


 Creating Your Local Address Book

 ÜÜÜ  To create an address in your Local Address Book

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose ADDRESS-BOOKS.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Local Address Book dialog box.

    3.  Type the subscriber's Quik-Comm Address.

 After you've entered the subscriber's Quik-Comm Address, you can also
 attach a comment to the address for some specific information about the
 subscriber, as described in the section titled "Attaching a Comment" in
 this chapter.

 Importing an ASCII File

 If you created an ASCII file containing addresses that you want to put in
 your Local Address Book, you can import this file so you don't have to type
 the addresses again.

 ÜÜÜ  To import a file into your Local Address Book

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose ADDRESS-BOOKS.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Local Address Book.

    3.  Move the highlight to the insertion point.

    4.  At the Local Address Book, press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose IMPORT.

    6.  Microsoft OnLine displays the Directory Manager dialog box.

    7.  Type either the name of the file you want, or, if you can't remember
        the whole filename, type part of the filename and use the DOS
        wildcard characters ? and *.

        If you want to display the directory of another subdirectory, enter
        that path name on the Directory Manager dialog box.

        If you press ENTER without specifying either the wildcard
        characters, filename, or DOS path name, Microsoft OnLine displays a
        directory of the current subdirectory.

    8.  Press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a list of files that match the selection
        criteria you typed.

    9.  Press the direction keys to move the <- on the right of the list to
        the file you want and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine imports the file into your Local Address Book.

 Attaching a Comment

 Your comment can contain the person's name, place of employment, or
 projects worked on. Comments must be enclosed in double quotation marks (")
 and can be up to 67 characters long. In general, make your comments
 as descriptive as you can.

 ÜÜÜ  To attach a comment to an address

    1.  After you've entered the subscriber's Quik-Comm Address, press the
        SPACEBAR, type double quotation marks ("), and then type a comment
        for the address.

    2.  End your comment by typing double quotation marks (") and then press
        ENTER to start the next address.


 Saving Your Local Address Book

 Once you've entered the addresses for your Local Address Book, you need to
 save them for future use.

 ÜÜÜ  To save your Local Address Book

    1.  When the Local Address Book is displayed, press the F1 key to
        display the menu.

    2.  Choose SAVE-ADDRESSES.

        Microsoft OnLine saves the Local Address Book.

        If you have unsaved changes and you press ESC, Microsoft OnLine
        prompts you either to save the changes or discard them.


 Printing Your Local Address Book

 You can print your Local Address Book on the printer attached to your
 computer. Before you print, make certain that your ONLINE.INI file is set up
 for your printer. See Chapter 2, "Installing Microsoft OnLine," for
 information.

 ÜÜÜ  To print your Local Address Book

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose ADDRESS-BOOKS.

        Microsoft OnLine displays your Local Address Book.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose PRINT.

        Microsoft OnLine prints your Local Address Book on the printer.


 Removing Your Local Address Book

 When you're done entering information into your Local Address Book, you can
 remove the book by pressing ESC.

 If you've made changes since you opened the Local Address Book, Microsoft
 OnLine displays a menu and asks you if you want to save the changes or
 discard them. Choose SAVE-ADDRESSES or DISCARD. If you want to do neither,
 press ESC, and Microsoft OnLine displays the Local Address Book again.


 Creating an Electronic Mail Message

 Before you connect to the Service to send your Electronic Mail Message, you
 need to create the message and save it to disk as a file. You use the same
 editing keystrokes and commands to create a message as you used to create
 your Local Address Book. To review these commands and keystrokes, see the
 section titled "Using the Keyboard with Electronic Mail" earlier in this
 chapter.

 You can also import a file from your disk into your message, and you can
 mark a passage in your message to paste into another message.

 If you modify the BT50.ZIF file, you can start your editor from the Main
 Screen to create either Electronic Mail Messages or Service Request
 Descriptions. For information, see Appendix C, "Customizing Microsoft
 OnLine."

 If you use your editor to create Electronic Mail Messages, be sure that you
 or your editor ends each line at 78 characters with the CR LF (Carriage
 Return, Line Feed) pair. Otherwise, when Microsoft OnLine transmits the
 message, it will send paragraphs as single long lines and then truncate
 these lines at 80 characters.

 Don't embed control or extended characters in the file. In addition, when
 you save your message with your editor's save command, be sure you save the
 file as unformatted (ASCII).

 Creating a Message

 ÜÜÜ  To create an Electronic Mail Message

    1.  From the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose EDIT.

    3.  Choose NEW.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a blank window on the screen for you to
        enter your message.

    4.  Type your message.

    5.  When you're done typing your message, make any corrections you need
        to make.

 Importing an ASCII File

 ÜÜÜ  To import an ASCII disk file into your message

    1.  Make certain that your message is displayed and move the highlight to
        the insertion point.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose IMPORT.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Directory Manager.

    4.  Type the filename or use a combination of characters and DOS wildcard
        characters and press ENTER.

        If you want to display the directory of another subdirectory, type
        that path name on the Directory Manager dialog box.

        If you press ENTER without specifying the wildcard characters,
        filename, or DOS path name, Microsoft OnLine displays a directory of
        the current subdirectory.

    5.  Microsoft OnLine displays a list of files on your disk that match the
        criteria you selected.

    6.  Move the <- on the right of the list to the file you want and press
        ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine imports the entire file into your message.

 Cutting and Pasting

 ÜÜÜ  To paste part of your message into a new message

    1.  Display the message that contains the information you want to copy
        and paste.

    2.  Mark the block of text you want to paste by pressing the + key at the
        beginning and again at the end of the block of text.

    3.  Press ESC.

        Microsoft OnLine removes the message from the display.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose EDIT.

    6.  Choose NEW.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a blank screen.

    7.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    8.  Choose PASTE to paste the text you marked into the new message.

 Returning to Edit a Message

 ÜÜÜ  To resume editing the message

    1.  If the menu isn't displayed, press F1 to display it.

    2.  Choose RESUME.

 Closing a Message

 ÜÜÜ  To close a message when you're done editing

    1.  If the menu isn't displayed, press F1 to display it.

    2.  Choose CLOSE.

        You can also press ESC to close a message.

        If you've made changes since the last time you saved the message,
        Microsoft OnLine displays a menu for you to choose to save the
        changes or not. To save the changes, choose SAVE-CHANGES from the
        menu. To discard the changes, choose DISCARD.


 Saving an Electronic Mail Message

 Once you're done entering and changing your message, you need to save it.

 ÜÜÜ  To save your message

    1.  While your message is displayed, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose FILE.

    3.  Choose SAVE-ON-DISK.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Save-As dialog box, where you enter the
        file name.

    4.  Enter the filename for your message and press ENTER.

    5.  Choose YES from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine saves the file to the name you specified and leaves
        the message on the screen.


 Editing an Electronic Mail Message

 After you've created your message and saved it to disk, you can open the
 message again and make changes if necessary.

 ÜÜÜ  To edit your message

    1.  Press F1 when Microsoft OnLine displays the Main Screen.

    2.  Choose EDIT.

    3.  Choose OPEN.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a dialog box for you to select your file.

    4.  Enter the filename or use the DOS wildcard characters.

        If you want to display the directory of another subdirectory, type
        that path name on the Directory Manager dialog box.

        If you press ENTER without specifying either the wildcard
        characters, filename, or DOS path name, Microsoft OnLine displays a
        directory of the current subdirectory.

    5.  Press the direction keys to move the <- on the right side of the
        listing to the file you want and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays your message for you to edit.


 Erasing an Electronic Mail Message

 If you no longer need a message or file on your disk, you can erase it.

 ÜÜÜ  To erase a message

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose EDIT.

    3.  Choose ERASE.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Directory Manager dialog box.

    4.  Type either the filename or, if you can't remember the whole
        filename, type part of the filename and use the DOS wildcard
        characters ? and *.

        If you want to display the directory of another subdirectory, type
        that path name on the Directory Manager dialog box.

        If you press ENTER without specifying either the wildcard
        characters, filename, or DOS path name, Microsoft OnLine displays a
        directory of the current subdirectory.

    5.  Press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a list of file(s) that match the selection
        criteria you typed.

    6.  Press the + key to mark the file(s) you want to erase. Press the -
        key to remove the highlight if you mark a file you don't want to
        erase.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Erase Confirmation dialog box.

    7.  Choose YES to delete all the marked files. If you don't want to
        delete the files, choose NO.


 Addressing an Electronic Mail Message

 Once you're done creating or editing your message, you need to address it
 before you send it.

 ÜÜÜ  To address your message

    1.  Display the message you want to address. (If you're not sure how to
        display the message, see the section titled "Editing an Electronic
        Mail Message" in this chapter.)

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose SEND.

    4.  Microsoft OnLine displays the Send dialog box.

    5.  Type the address(es) for the recipient(s) of your message.

        If you don't remember the address(es), put a ? in the Send TO or CC
        line. Then press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays your Local Address Book. Mark the
        address(es) you want to copy by pressing the + key on the numeric
        keypad for each address you want to copy to the Address dialog box.
        Then press ENTER. Microsoft OnLine pastes these address(es) to your
        Address dialog box.

        If the address(es) is in the Service Address Book, you can copy it
        from there to your Local Address Book dialog box. See the following
        section titled "Searching the Service Address Book for an Address"
        for more information.

    6.  If you want to copy the message to people other than the
        recipient(s), press the UP or DOWN key to select the CC line and
        type the address for the recipient(s) for the copy.

    7.  If you want to clear the Address and CC lines, choose CLEAR-ADDRESSES
        from the menu. Then type your addresses again.

    8.  After you've addressed your message, press the DOWN key to move the
        highlight to the Subject line.

    9.  Type the subject for your message and press ENTER.

   10.  If you want to place the message in the Out Basket, choose DROP-IN-
        OUTBASKET from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a message telling you that it is placing
        your message in the Out Basket and then displays your message text
        again.

   11.  To close your message, choose CLOSE from the menu.


 Searching the Service Address Book for an Address

 You display the address books to choose an address for your Electronic Mail
 Messages. You can either select an address from your Local Address Book or
 you can search for an address in the Service Address Book if you don't know
 the recipient's address.

 If you need to find an address in the Service Address Book, you can search
 for the address or for an address description. Once you've found the
 address(es) in the Service Address Book, you can copy the most frequently
 used addresses into your Local Address Book.

 Displaying the Find Service Address Dialog Box

 ÜÜÜ  To display the Find Service Address dialog box

    1.  Connect to the Service.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose ADDRESS-BOOKS.

    4.  Choose SEARCH.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Find Service Address dialog box.

 Searching the Service Address Book

 Once you've displayed the Find Service Address dialog box, you can search
 for the address of a subscriber.

 ÜÜÜ  To search the Service Address Book

    1.  Type the information for the address search. You can type upper- or
        lower-case letters.

        For example, if you're looking for an address for Jack Smith, type
        smith on the search line.

    2.  Choose one of the following on the menu:

        FIND ANY When you choose FIND-ANY, Microsoft OnLine displays any
        addresses or address descriptions that contain the word smith.

        MATCH-ADDRESS When you choose MATCH-ADDRESS, Microsoft OnLine
        searches the addresses for the word smith, but doesn't search the
        address descriptions.

        EXACT When you choose EXACT, Microsoft OnLine displays only
        addresses that match the word smith exactly.

    3.  When you've found the address you want, mark it by pressing the + key
        when the highlight is on the first and last character of the address
        you want.

        You can choose more than one address by pressing the + key again when
        the highlight is on the first and last character of the addresses you
        want. You can mark a series of addresses in the list as long as they
        are consecutive.

        For example, if the addresses in the list were numbered 1 through 10,
        you could mark the first letter of address 4 and the last letter of
        address 7 by pressing the + key when the highlight is in these
        character positions. However, you cannot mark addresses 1, 3, 5, and
        9 as a group. Because they are not consecutive addresses, you will
        need to copy them one at a time to your Local Address Book.

        You can then copy the address(es) to your Local Address Book.

 Copying Addresses from the Service Address Book

 You don't have to search the Service Address Book each time you need to
 send a message. You can copy the address(es) you marked in the Service
 Address Book to your Local Address Book. This procedure assumes that you
 have already searched for a Service Address and that you have marked the
 address in the Service Address Book you want to copy.

 ÜÜÜ  To copy a Service Address to your Local Address Book

    1.  Press ESC until you see LOCAL SEARCH HELP on the menu.

    2.  Choose LOCAL from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays your Local Address Book.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Move the highlight to the insertion point.

    5.  Choose PASTE to enter the address into your Local Address Book.

    6.  Press ESC to exit the address book.

    7.  Choose SAVE CHANGES on the menu.


 Displaying the Contents of the Out Basket

 After you've placed messages in the Out Basket, you can view the messages
 stored there. If there are messages waiting to be sent in the Out Basket,
 Microsoft OnLine displays three upward pointing arrows in the Out Basket
 Icon.

 ÜÜÜ  To display the contents of the Out Basket

    1.  From the Main Screen, select the Out Basket Icon and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the type of message, the type of item (file
        or text) the subject, the recipient's address, and the date.

        The Out Basket displays text items, which are messages waiting to be
        sent, and lists, which are lists that contain other items. For
        example, the Already Sent List contains a list of messages that
        you've already sent to other subscribers.

        To select an item in the Out Basket, move the <- to the right of the
        item you want and press ENTER. Microsoft OnLine displays either the
        item or another list.

    2.  To close the item, press ESC.

    3.  To close the Out Basket List, press ESC.


 Sending an Electronic Mail Message

 Before you can send messages, you need to create and address them and drop
 them in the Out Basket. After you've placed your messages in the Out Basket,
 you need to connect to the Service. Then you're ready to send your
 messages.

 Microsoft OnLine must be installed and the Configuration Parameters set
 before you can connect to the Service. If you haven't installed Microsoft
 OnLine or haven't set up your Configuration Parameters, see Chapter 2,
 "Installing Microsoft OnLine," for more information.

 Connecting to the Service

 ÜÜÜ  To connect to the Service

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Connect to Service Icon and press
        ENTER.

    2.  When Microsoft OnLine displays the Connect to Service dialog box,
        type your Password and choose YES from the menu.

    3.  Microsoft OnLine displays a Connect to Service screen indicating the
        steps it takes to connect to the Service.

        When you are connected, Microsoft OnLine displays the Main Screen
        again, but with several additional icons.

 Sending All Messages

 ÜÜÜ  To send all messages in the Out Basket

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Connect to Service Icon and press
        ENTER.

    2.  After the connection is complete, select the Out Basket Icon and
        press ENTER.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose SEND-OUT-BASKET.

    5.  Choose ALL.

    6.  Microsoft OnLine displays the Send screen, which lists the number of
        characters in your message and the estimated transmission time.

    7.  Choose STAY-CONNECTED to stay connected to the Service after
        transmission. Choose DISCONNECT to disconnect from the Service after
        transmission.

    8.  If you have addressed a message incorrectly, Microsoft OnLine will
        display a message and give you the opportunity to correct it. For
        information, see the section titled "Correcting an Address" in this
        chapter.

    9.  When Microsoft OnLine begins the message transfer process, it
        displays the Transfer screen.

        You will see a Transfer screen for each message you are sending.

   10.  After Microsoft OnLine completes the message transfer process, you
        see the Send Status screen, which tells you if your messages have
        been sent successfully.

   11.  Press ENTER.

 Sending Selected Messages

 ÜÜÜ  To select the message(s) to send

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Connect to Host Icon and press
        ENTER.

    2.  After the connection is complete, select the Out Basket Icon and
        press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a list of the messages waiting in the Out
        Basket.

    3.  Use the direction keys to move the <- to the first message you want
        to send.

    4.  Press +

        Microsoft OnLine selects the message.

    5.  Repeat steps 3 and 4 for each message you want to send.

    6.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    7.  Choose SEND-OUT-BASKET.

    8.  Choose SELECTED.

    9.  Choose STAY-CONNECTED to stay connected to the Service after
        transmission. Choose DISCONNECT to disconnect from the Service after
        transmission.

   10.  After all the messages have been sent, press ENTER.

   11.  Microsoft OnLine displays the Send screen, which lists the number of
        characters in your message and the estimated transmission time.

        If you have addressed a message incorrectly, Microsoft OnLine will
        display a message and give you the opportunity to correct it. For
        information, see the following section titled "Correcting an
        Address."

   12.  When Microsoft OnLine begins the message transfer process, it
        displays the Transfer screen.

        You will see a Transfer screen for each message you are sending.

   13.  After Microsoft OnLine completes the message transfer process, you
        see the Send Status screen, which tells you if your messages have
        been sent successfully.

   14.  Press ENTER to close the Status screen.


 Correcting an Address

 You may accidentally address your message incorrectly. If Microsoft OnLine
 can't find the address for your message, it displays a message telling you
 so.

 ÜÜÜ  To correct an address

    1.  Choose RE-ADDRESS from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Address dialog box.

    2.  Fill in the correct address.

        If you don't remember the address(es), put a ? in the Send TO or CC
        line. Then press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays your Local Address Book. Mark the
        address(es) you want to copy by pressing the + key on the numeric
        keypad for each address you want to copy to the Address dialog box.
        Then press ENTER. Microsoft OnLine pastes these addresses to your
        Address dialog box.

    3.  If you want to copy the message to people other than the
        recipient(s), press the UP or DOWN key to select the CC line and type
        the address(es) for the copy recipient(s).

    4.  After you've addressed your message, press the DOWN key to move the
        highlight to the Subject line.

    5.  Type the subject for your message on the Subject line and press
        ENTER.

    6.  If you want to clear the Address and CC lines, select CLEAR-ADDRESSES
        from the menu. Then enter your addresses again.

    7.  If you want to drop the message in the Out Basket, select DROP-IN-
        OUTBASKET from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a message telling you that it is placing
        your message in the Out Basket and then displays your message text
        again.

        If you want to send your message immediately, choose SEND-NOW.
        Microsoft OnLine displays the Send screen.

    8.  To remove your message, select CLOSE from the menu.


 Removing an Item

 You can remove a file or text item you placed on the system if the
 information is incorrect or out of date.

 When you remove an item, you can remove your copy or any copy of the item
 that hasn't been read or downloaded on the System, including copies in the
 recipients' In Baskets. However, once someone has read the message or
 downloaded the file to a disk, you can't delete his copy of the item.

 To remove your copy only, you can be disconnected from the Service. To
 remove all the copies on the System including your own copy, you must be
 connected to the Service.

 If the item you want to remove is a file, and you follow this procedure,
 you will remove the file listing from your Out Basket, but the file will
 still be on your disk. See the section titled "Removing a File Item" in
 this chapter for instructions.

 Removing a Message

 ÜÜÜ  To remove a message

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Out Basket Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Choose a list or item and press ENTER.

    3.  Press the direction keys to move the <- to the first message you want
        to remove.

    4.  Press +

        Microsoft OnLine selects the message.

        To remove the highlight from a message, move the <- to the message
        you want and press the - key.

    5.  Repeat steps 3 and 4 for each message you want to remove.

    6.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    7.  Choose CANCEL and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a menu with the options ALL and YOUR-COPY.

        ALL cancels all copies of this message, including recipients' copies
        and your copy of the message in your Quik-Comm Already Sent List.

        YOUR-COPY cancels only the copy of the message in your Quik-Comm
        Already Sent List. You will not be able to open your message if you
        choose YOUR-COPY.

    8.  Choose ALL or YOUR-COPY.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a message telling you that it is cancelling
        your message.

 Removing a File Item

 ÜÜÜ  To remove a file item

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Out Basket Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Press the direction keys to move the <- to the first file you want to
        remove.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose EDIT.

    5.  Choose ERASE.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Directory Manager dialog box.

    6.  Type the name of the file you want to delete and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Erase Confirmation dialog box.

    7.  Choose YES or NO on the dialog box.


 Finding Out Who Has Read Your Message

 After you've sent a message, you can find out who has read it.

 ÜÜÜ  To find out who has read your message

    1.  Make certain that you are connected to the Service.

    2.  At the Main Screen, select the Out Basket Icon and press ENTER.

    3.  Choose the Quik-Comm Already Sent List and press ENTER.

    4.  Press the direction keys to move the <- to the first message for
        which you want to know who has read it.

    5.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    6.  Choose WHO'S READ from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Who's Read screen, which lists the time
        and date that the recipient read the message. It also indicates if
        there are any recipients who have not read the message. Microsoft
        OnLine also lists the reader's address and any description you may
        have attached to it when you created your Local Address Book.

    7.  Repeat steps 2 through 6 for each message.


 Uploading a File to Another Subscriber

 You can upload a file that contains text and graphics to another
 subscriber.

 ÜÜÜ  To upload a file

    1.  At the Main Screen, press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose EDIT.

    3.  Choose UPLOAD.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Directory Manager dialog box.

    4.  Type either the name of the file you want or, if you can't remember
        the whole filename, type part of the filename and use the DOS
        wildcard characters ? and *.

        If you want to display the directory of another subdirectory, type
        that path name on the Directory Manager dialog box.

        If you press ENTER without specifying the wildcard characters,
        filename, or DOS path name, Microsoft OnLine displays the directory
        of the current subdirectory.

    5.  Press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a list of file(s) that match the selection
        criteria you typed.

    6.  Press the direction keys to move the <- to the right of the file you
        want and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Upload dialog box.

    7.  Fill in the Application line so that the recipient knows what
        application to use to access the file.

    8.  Choose what type of device will be receiving this file:

        MY-DEVICE indicates that the receiving machine is an IBM-compatible
        personal computer that runs MS-DOS or its equivalent.

        ANY-DEVICE indicates that the receiving machine is any other type
        of machine that can access this file. Examples might include machines
        that run Xenix, CP/M, or Apple operating systems.

    9.  Fill in the Comments lines to add comments that describes the file
        you are sending. For example, you might include a description of the
        file and how it might be used . Also include the operating system for
        the file.

   10.  Choose YES at the bottom of the dialog box to proceed. Or choose NO
        or HELP. If you choose NO, Microsoft OnLine returns you to the Main
        Screen.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Send dialog box.

   11.  Type the address(es) for the recipient(s) of your file.

        If you don't remember the address(es), put a ? in the Send TO or CC
        line. Then press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays your Local Address Book. Mark the
        address(es) you want to copy to the Address dialog box by pressing
        the + key on the numeric keypad for each address you want to copy to
        the Address dialog box. Then press ENTER. Microsoft OnLine pastes
        these address to your Address dialog box.

   12.  If you want to copy the file to people other than the recipient(s),
        press the UP or DOWN key to highlight the CC line and ENTER the
        address(es) for the copy recipient(s).

   13.  After you've addressed your file, press the DOWN key to move the
        highlight to the Subject line.

   14.  Type the subject for your message on the Subject line and press
        ENTER.

   15.  If you want to drop the message in the Out Basket, select DROP-IN-
        OUTBASKET from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a message telling you that it is placing
        your message in the Out Basket.

        If you want to send the message immediately, choose SEND-NOW.
        Microsoft OnLine displays the Transfer screen and then the Main
        Screen.


 Forwarding an Electronic Mail Message

 If you send an Electronic Mail Message and then discover that you did not
 send it to everyone who needed it, you can forward it to other subscribers.
 You can't forward a message to someone on the original distribution list or
 to yourself, and you can forward only text items.

 ÜÜÜ  To forward an Electronic Mail Message

    1.  Select the Out Basket Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Open your Already Sent List by moving the <- to this list and
        pressing ENTER.

    3.  Select the message you want to forward by positioning the <- to its
        right.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose FORWARD.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Forward dialog box.

    6.  Type the addresses to which you want to forward the message. You can
        type up to 50 names.

    7.  Choose FORWARD-NOW and press ENTER.

        If you choose CLEAR-ADDRESSES, Microsoft OnLine clears the addresses
        on the dialog box so you can enter them again.

    8.  Microsoft OnLine forwards your message to addresses you entered on
        the Forward dialog box.


 Printing an Electronic Mail Message

 After you've created a message, you can print it on your printer. There are
 two methods you can use to print a message you created. Use method 1 if you
 haven't sent the message yet. Use method 2 if you have sent the message.

 ÜÜÜ  To print a message you created

 Method 1: if you haven't sent the message

    1.  Open the Out Basket by selecting the icon and then pressing ENTER.

    2.  Open the message you want to print by positioning the <- to the right
        of the item and pressing ENTER.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose PRINT.

 Method 2: if you have sent the message

    1.  Open the Out Basket by selecting the icon and pressing ENTER.

    2.  Select the Quik-Comm Already Sent List by pressing the direction keys
        to position the <- to the right of the list.

    3.  Select the individual message by positioning the <- to the right of
        the item you want.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose OUTPUT from the menu.

    6.  Choose PRINT.


 Working with Electronic Mail Messages from Others

 When the In Basket Icon has three arrows pointing down, you have messages
 waiting there to be opened and read. These messages stay in the In Basket
 until you delete them. You can read, print, or save these messages to a file
 on your disk. You can also add these messages to your Local Filing Cabinet
 and respond quickly to a message.

 Reading a Message

 ÜÜÜ  To read a message

    1.  Select the In Basket Icon and press ENTER.

        You may see several items:

        ş An Already Read List of messages that you've already read.

        ş TEXT is a new message.

        ş FILE is a new file.

    2.  If want to read just one message, select the message you want by
        pressing the + key when the <- is to the right of the message. Then
        press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the message.

 Reading Multiple Messages

 ÜÜÜ  To read multiple messages

    1.  If you want to read multiple messages, move the <- to the right of
        the first message and press the + key on the numeric keypad to mark
        the message. Microsoft OnLine selects the message. Mark each message
        that you want to read.

    2.  When you're done marking each message you want to read, press
        ENTER. Microsoft OnLine displays the first message.

    3.  After you're done reading the first message, press ESC. Microsoft
        OnLine closes the message and displays the next one in the list.

 Printing a Message

 You can print an Electronic Mail Message using one of two methods. Use
 method 1 if the message is displayed. Use method 2 if you have a list of
 items from which to choose.

 ÜÜÜ  To print an Electronic Mail Message

 Method 1: from a displayed message

    1.  Select the In Basket Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Open the message you want to print by positioning the <- to the right
        of the item and pressing ENTER.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose PRINT.

 Method 2: from a message list

    1.  Select the In Basket Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Select the list of items you want by positioning the <- to the right
        of the list.

    3.  Select the individual message by positioning the <- to the right of
        the item you want and pressing the + key on the numeric keypad.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose OUTPUT from the menu.

    6.  Choose PRINT.

 Saving File Items to Disk

 If someone sends you a file, you can save it to disk.

 ÜÜÜ  To save a file item to disk

    1.  If you select a file item and press ENTER, Microsoft OnLine
        displays the Receive screen.

    2.  Choose YES at the bottom of the screen.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Save-As dialog box

    3.  Type the filename in which you want to save the item on your disk.

        Microsoft OnLine then displays the Transfer screen.

        When the transfer is complete, the file is available on your disk
        with the name you specified.

 Saving Messages to Disk

 ÜÜÜ  To save an Electronic Mail Message to disk

    1.  Open a message as described in the section titled "Reading a
        Message" in this chapter.

    2.  When the message is on the display, press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose SAVE-TO-DISK.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Save In dialog box for you to name the
        file where you want the item stored.

    4.  Type the filename and choose SAVE from the menu.

 Responding to a Message

 If you want to reply to a message that someone sent you, you can do it
 quickly. When you respond to a message, Microsoft OnLine labels the message
 as a response so the recipient will know that it's a response to his
 message. In addition, Microsoft OnLine automatically addresses the response
 message for you.

 ÜÜÜ  To respond to a message

    1.  Open a message as described in the section titled "Reading a
        Message" in this chapter.

    2.  When the message is displayed, press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose RESPOND.

    4.  Type your response on the blank screen that appears and then choose
        SEND from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Address dialog box including the
        address of the person who sent the message. If the original memo
        contained a list of people to receive copies (cc:), these individuals
        are also included automatically. The Subject line contains the
        subject of the original memo.

    5.  Choose DROP-IN-BASKET to drop the message into your Out Basket to be
        sent the next time you send messages

        If you want to send your response immediately, choose SEND-NOW to
        transmit the message immediately.

        In either case, when the recipient looks at his In Basket, he or she
        will see the subject of the original message to which you are
        responding preceded by a Re:. For example, if the subject of the
        message you're responding to is Project XYZ, your response message's
        subject will be Re: Project XYZ.


 Storing Items in Your Local In Basket

 Once you've received a file or message, you have two different ways to add
 the information to your Local In Basket, which you can access when not
 connected to the Service. Then the information will be available for
 creating messages and for storing in your Local Filing Cabinet.

 Use method 1 if you have only one item to add to your Local In Basket. Use
 method 2 if you have more than one item.

 ÜÜÜ  To store items in your Local In Basket

 Method 1: for one item

    1.  Find the message you want to store in your Local In Basket.

    2.  Display the item by positioning the <- to the right of the item and
        pressing ENTER.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose ADD-TO-LOCAL.

        Microsoft OnLine adds the item to your Local Mail List. For
        information about storing the item in your Local Filing Cabinet, see
        the section titled "Managing Your Local Filing Cabinet" at the end
        of this chapter.

 Method 2: for a list of items

    1.  Display the list of items you want.

    2.  Select each item you want by pressing the + key when the <- is to the
        right of the item. If you want to receive all the items in the list,
        you don't need to mark them.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose GET-ITEMS.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Get Items dialog box. You use this
        dialog box to tell Microsoft OnLine what items and what type of items
        to get and to select other options.

    5.  Select GET ALL or GET SELECTED. GET ALL retrieves all the items in
        the displayed list. GET SELECTED retrieves only the items that you've
        marked with the + key.

    6.  Select GET FILES, GET DOCUMENTS, or GET BOTH. GET FILES retrieves
        only file items. GET DOCUMENTS retrieves only text items. GET BOTH
        retrieves both files and text items.

    7.  Select STAY-CONNECTED or DISCONNECT either to stay connected to the
        Service or to disconnect from the Service after Microsoft OnLine gets
        the items.

    8.  Select SAVE-LOCALLY or DISPLAY-ONLY either to save the items to your
        Local In Basket or just to display the items.

    9.  Select PRINT YES or NO. YES prints the items as they are received. NO
        doesn't print the items.

   10.  Choose YES to retrieve the items. Choose NO to cancel retrieving the
        items.


 Managing Your Local Filing Cabinet

 You can organize the information you get from Microsoft OnLine in a Local
 Filing Cabinet. This Local Filing Cabinet can store three types of items:
 lists, text, and files. Lists contain information related to the name of the
 list. Text items can be text items you downloaded from the Exchange or the
 Information Sources or Electronic Mail Messages. Files are files that you
 retrieved and saved locally. You can open your Local Filing Cabinet either
 when you are connected to or disconnected from the Service.

 The lists in the Local Filing Cabinet work similarly to lists in the
 Exchange. In both cases, the lists are analogous to folders that can contain
 other lists or items. In the Local Filing Cabinet, you can create and add
 lists and move or copy items into those lists. You can have a maximum of 95
 lists with 9,999 items in each list; these numbers may vary with the storage
 capacity of your computer's disk.

 This section discusses creating and managing the items in your lists and
 assumes that the items are already in your Local In Basket. For information
 about placing items in your Local In Basket, see the section titled "Storing
 Items in Your Local In Basket" in this chapter.

 For information about adding items to your Local In Basket from the
 Exchange, see the section titled "Downloading Items to Your Local In
 Basket" in Chapter 7, "Using The Exchange."

 For information about adding items to your Local In Basket from the
 Information Sources, see the section titled "Downloading Items to Your Local
 In Basket" in Chapter 4, "Finding Answers with Microsoft OnLine."

 For information about adding messages or files you've received from other
 subscribers to your Local In Basket, see the section titled "Storing Items
 in Your Local In Basket" in this chapter.

 Creating a New List

 ÜÜÜ  To create a new list

    1.  Open the In Basket Icon.

    2.  Move the <- to select the Local Filing Cabinet list and press
        ENTER.

    3.  Open the list under which you want to create your new list. If you
        want to create a list at the top level of the Local Filing Cabinet,
        don't open another list.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose ADD-LIST.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the List Name dialog box.

    6.  Type the name of the new list (up to 21 characters) and press
        ENTER.

    7.  Type the path of the subdirectory where you want the data stored. The
        default subdirectory is the one you indicated when you set up your
        Communications Profile.

        If the path doesn't already exist, Microsoft OnLine displays the
        Invalid Path dialog box.

        Choose TRY-AGAIN, CREATE, or SKIP.

        TRY-AGAIN tells Microsoft OnLine to look for the directory again.

        CREATE creates the directory you entered.

        SKIP returns you to the List Name dialog box.

    8.  Choose PROCEED to create the new list. If you don't want to create
        the list, choose SKIP.

    9.  Microsoft OnLine displays an updated set of lists with your new list
        included.

 Copying Items to a List

 Once a text item or file is in your Local In Basket or Local Filing
 Cabinet, you can copy the item from list to list. However, you can't copy
 lists to other lists.

 ÜÜÜ  To copy items to a list

    1.  Open the In Basket Icon.

    2.  Find the item(s) you want to copy by moving down through the lists.

    3.  Mark the item(s) by positioning the <- to the right of the item and
        pressing the + key.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose COPY.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a list of lists.

    6.  Move the <- to the right of the destination list and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine copies the items to the destination list.

 Moving Items Between Lists

 Once a text item or file is in your Local In Basket or Local Filing
 Cabinet, you can move the item from list to list. However, you can't move
 lists to other lists.

 ÜÜÜ  To move items from one list to another

    1.  Open the In Basket Icon.

    2.  Find the item(s) you want to move by moving down through the lists.

    3.  Mark the item(s) by positioning the <- to the right of the item and
        pressing the + key.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose MOVE.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a list of lists.

    6.  Move the <- to the right of the destination list and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine moves the items to the destination list.

 Deleting Items in a List

 ÜÜÜ  To delete items in a list

    1.  Open the In Basket Icon.

    2.  Open the list that contains the items you want to delete.

    3.  Mark each item in the list by pressing the + key when the <- is to
        the right of the item.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose DELETE.

        Microsoft OnLine deletes the marked items.

 Deleting a List

 Before you can delete a list, you need to delete all the items in that
 list. If you have several lists underneath a list and you want to delete the
 top-level list, you need to delete all the items in the lower-level lists,
 delete the lower-level lists, and then delete the top-level list.

 ÜÜÜ  To delete a list

    1.  Open the In Basket Icon.

    2.  Open the list you want to delete.

    3.  Mark each item in the list by pressing the + key when the <- is to
        the right of the item.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose DELETE.

        Microsoft OnLine deletes the marked items.

    6.  Press ENTER.

    7.  Move the <- to the list you want to delete.

    8.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    9.  Choose DELETE.

        Microsoft OnLine deletes the list and then displays an updated list.


 Chapter 7.  Using the Exchange
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter describes how to:

    ş   Use the Exchange to find specific information.

    ş   Download items to your computer.

    ş   Post items on the Exchange.

 The Microsoft OnLine Exchange contains text and files that are posted by
 the Microsoft System Administrator and other subscribers.  The main
 difference between the Information Sources and the Exchange is that you can
 post items in the Exchange to share information with other subscribers.
 For example, you may want to upload utilities for Windows applications that
 you've modified so other developers can use them.

 The topics if the Exchange are set up by the Microsoft System
 Administrator.  You must be connected to the Service to use the Exchange.

 The Exchange contains a wide range of information.  To assist you in
 finding the specific information you need, the data in the Exchange is
 organized in a tree structure as shown in this illustration.

 When you first open the Exchange Icon, you see a list of general topics:

 List Title                        Contents

 New Information                   Most rercent entries in the Exchange;
                                   items are kept here for one week

 Bulletins                         Latest bulletins from Microsoft

 General Comments and Opinions     Your opinions about Microsoft or
                                   another other topic

 Product Support Services          Microsoft Support Services information,
                                   including support for Microsoft OnLine,
                                   GEnie, and Telemarketing Support

 Customer Service                  Information about product updates and
                                   orders

 Microsoft University and          Current information about Microsoft
   Training List                   courses and services

 International Issues              Issues of interest to subscribers outside
                                   of the United States.

 Beyond these topics, the Exchange is divided by product families
 (Operating Environment, Languages, Utilities, Hardware, Applications,
 and Educational/Recreational). For each product family, there's a
 section for each supported product. Each product section also has an
 associated Software Exchange category, which is where you should upload
 and download files.

 The Exchange offers three general types of items: lists, text, and files.
 Lists contain text, file, or additional list entries. Files contain either
 binary or ASCII files. Text contains literal text files you can read on
 your screen. Both text and files can be downloaded to your computer for
 storing in a disk file or printing on your printer.

 As you work through lists and downwards through the tree structure,
 Microsoft OnLine displays the titles of the items you opened so you can
 trace upwards through the tree.


 Finding an Item in the Exchange

 ÜÜÜ  To find an item

    1.  Make certain that you're connected to the Service.

    2.  At the Main Screen, select the Exchange Icon and press ENTER.
        Microsoft OnLine displays the top level of lists. You can tell the
        item type by looking at the left-hand column of the display.

    3.  Press the direction keys to move the <- to the item you want and
        press ENTER.

        If the item you selected is a list, Microsoft OnLine displays either
        the items in that list or another series of lists. You can then
        continue down through a series of lists until you find what you
        need.

        If the item you selected is text, Microsoft OnLine displays the text
        of the item.

    4.  Continue searching through the items until you find the item you
        want.

        When you find the item you want, you can download it to a disk file
        or print it on your printer.


 Downloading Items

 Once you've found the item you want, you can download it to your disk or
 print it on your printer.

 Saving a File to Disk

 ÜÜÜ  To download a file and save it to disk

    1.  If the item you selected is a file, Microsoft OnLine displays the
        Receive dialog box.

    2.  Choose YES to receive the file.

    3.  Type the name of the file in which you want to store the file.
        Microsoft OnLine displays the Transfer dialog box.

        After the transfer is complete, you can access the file on your disk
        with the filename you specified.

 Saving a Text Item to Disk

 ÜÜÜ  To download a text item and save it to disk

    1.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose SAVE-TO-DISK from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Save As dialog box so you can specify
        a filename for that item.

    3.  Fill in the filename and press ENTER.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Transfer screen. When the transfer is
        complete, the file is available for your use on your disk with the
        name you specified.

 Printing a Text Item

 ÜÜÜ  To download a text item and print it on your printer

    1.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose PRINT from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine prints the item on your printer.

 Downloading Items to Your Local In Basket

 Once you've found the information you want, you have two ways to add the
 information to your Local In Basket, which you can access both when not
 connected to or connected to the Service.  Then the information will be
 available for creating messages and for storing in your Local Filing
 Cabinet.

 There are two methods for downloading items to your Local In Basket.  Use
 method 1 if you have only one item to add to your Local In Basket.  Use
 method 2 if you have more than one item.

 ÜÜÜ  To download items to your Local In Basket

 Method 1: for one item

    1.  Find the item you want.

    2.  Display the item by positioning the <- to the right of the item
        and pressing ENTER.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose ADD-TO-LOCAL.

 Microsoft OnLine adds the item to your Local In Basket. For Information
 about storing the item in your Local Filing Cabinet, see the section
 titled "Managing Your Local Filing Cabinet" in Chapter 6, "Using Electronic
 Mail."

 Method 2: for a list of items

    1.  Find the list of items you want.

    2.  Select each item you want by pressing the + key when the <- is
        to the right of the item. If you want to receive all the items in
        the list, you don't need to make any of them.

    3.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    4.  Choose GET-ITEMS.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Get Items dialog box.  You use this
        dialog box to tell Microsft OnLine what items and what type of items
        to get, and to select other options.

    5.  Select GET ALL or GET SELECTED. GET ALL retrieves all the items in
        the displayed list. GET SELECTED retrieves only the items that you've
        marked with the + key.

    6.  Select GET FILES, GET DOCUMENTS, or GET BOTH.  GET FILES retrieves
        only file items.  GET DOCUMENTS retrieves only text items.  GET BOTH
        retrieves both file and text items.

    7.  Select STAY-CONNECTED or DISCONNECT either to stay connected to the
        Service or to disconnect from the Service after Microsoft OnLine
        retrieves the items.

    8.  Select SAVE-LOCALLY or DISPLAY-ONLY either to save the items to your
        Local In Basket or just to display the items.

    9.  Select PRINT YES or NO.  YES prints the items as they are received.
        NO doesn't print the items.

   10.  Choose YES to retrieve the items.  Choose NO to cancel retrieving
        the items.

        Microsoft OnLine adds the item to you Local In Basket. For
        information about storing the item in your Local Filing Cabinet, see
        the section titled "Managing Your Local Filing Cabinet" in Chapter
        6, "Using Electronic Mail."


 Posting an Item on the Exchange

 You can post either a text item or a file on the Exchange. When you post
 an item, you enter the subject or title for the item; make the title as
 descriptive as you can. In addition, be sure to specify the product name,
 the operating system, and the product and operating system version numbers.

 In order to see your item posted on the Exchange, you need to exit the
 Exchange after you transmit the item and then open the Exchange again.

 Although you can post text items anywhere on the Exchange, post them at
 the lowest appropriate level of the hierarchy. The Microsoft System
 Administrator will move items posted in inappropriate locations.

 If you have problems that are not likely to be resolved by a Service
 Request or are related to the operation of Microsoft OnLine, send an
 Electronic Mail Message to the Microsoft OnLine Editor using the alias
 EDITOR. For more information see the section titled "For More Information"
 in Chapter 1, "Before you Begin."

 Posting a Text Item

 ÜÜÜ  To post a text item in the Exchange

    1.  At the Main Screen, select the Exchange Icon and press ENTER.

    2.  Work you way down through the topics until you find the list under
        which you want to post your text item. Post your item at the lowest
        level in the hierarchy.

    3.  Open the list in which you want to post your item. To open the list,
        move the <- to the right of the list you want and press ENTER.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose EDIT.

    6.  Choose NEW.

    7.  Compose your contribution to the Exchange.

    8.  When you are done composing your contribution, press F1 to display
        the menu again.

    9.  Choose SEND.

   10.  Choose BULLETIN-BOARD.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Subject dialog box.

   11.  Type a subject of your contribution and choose PROCEED from the
        menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Transfer screen.

   12.  After the transfer is complete, press ESC twice to return to the
        Exchange topic list.

 Posting a File

 When you post a file on the Exchange, post it in the Software Exchange
 for the appropriate operating environment and product. For example, if you
 want to post a Windows utility, you would post it in the Software Exchange
 for the appropriate Windows product.

 ÜÜÜ  To post a file on the Exchange

    1.  At the Main Screen press F1 to display the menu.

    2.  Choose EDIT.

    3.  Choose UPLOAD.

    4.  Choose BULLETIN-BOARD.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Directory Manager dialog box.

    5.  Select the file you want to upload by moving the <- to the file and
        pressing ENTER.

    6.  Fill in the Application line on the Transfer dialog box by typing
        the name of the application used to open the file.

    7.  Choose the type of device that can access the file.

    8.  Type the operating system and any other useful information about
        the file.

    9.  Choose YES.

        Microsoft OnLine displays a dialog box where you specify the title
        or subject for the file you are posting.

   10.  Type the subject or title for the file and press ENTER.

        Microsft OnLine displays the Transfer screen.


 Removing Your Contribution

 You can remove only items that you posted on the Exchange.  For example,
 you might want to remove an item because the information is no longer
 timely or accurate. You can remove your items one at a time; you can't
 remove more than one item at a time or items others have posted.

 ÜÜÜ  To remove your contribution to the Exchange

    1.  Open the Exchange Icon.

    2.  Look through the lists until you find the item you want to remove.

    3.  Move the <- to the right of the item.

    4.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    5.  Choose REMOVE.

        Microsoft OnLine removes the item and then displays an updated list
        of topics.


 Chapter 8.  Microsoft OnLine Reference
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter contains reference information about:

    ş   Displaying System status.

    ş   Menu commands.


 Displaying System Status

 You can display the current status of the Communications line and
 information about your System usage for this month and the previous month.
 Before displaying status, you need to be connected to the Service.

 If you are having communications problems, review the Network/
 Communications Status screen. If you can provide the terminal ID, the last
 error code, and line error number, it will be easier for support personnel
 to diagnose the problem.

 Displaying Communications Line Status

 ÜÜÜ  To display Communications line status

    1.  Make certain you are connected to the Service.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose STATUS.

    4.  Choose COMMUNICATIONS.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Network/Communications Status screen,
        which lists your terminal ID, the last error code, and the number of
        the line errors that occurred.

    5.  Make a note of this information.

    6.  Choose OK from the menu at the bottom of the screen to return to the
        Main Screen.

 Displaying System Usage Information

 ÜÜÜ  To display System usage information

    1.  Make certain you are connected to the Service.

    2.  Press F1 to display the menu.

    3.  Choose COMMUNICATIONS from the menu.

    4.  Choose SYSTEM USAGE from the menu.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the System Usage screen, which shows your
        system usage for this month and the previous month in hours and
        minutes.

    5.  Press ESC to close the System Usage screen.

 Printing System Usage Information

 ÜÜÜ  To print System usage information

    1.  When the System Usage screen is displayed, press F1 to display the
        menu.

    2.  Choose PRINT.

 Assuming that your printer has power and paper and is configured correctly,
 Microsoft OnLine prints the System usage information on the printer attached
 to your computer. For more information about setting up your printer, see
 Chapter 2, "Installing Microsoft OnLine."

 Saving System Usage Information to Disk

 ÜÜÜ  To save System usage information to a disk file

    1.  When the System Usage screen is displayed, press F1 to display the
        menu.

    2.  Choose SAVE-ON-DISK.

        Microsoft OnLine displays the Save As dialog box.

    3.  Type the filename to save the file on your disk.


 Menu Commands

 This section describes each Microsoft OnLine menu command. This section is
 divided into two general sections:

    ş   Non-Service menus (those you display when disconnected from the
        Service)

    ş   Service menus (those you display when connected to the Service)

 Within each section, the menus are organized by the software module you use
 when you display the menu. For example, the Exchange has a different set of
 menus than the In Basket. Within each module, the menu items appear in the
 same order as in the displayed menus.

 In all cases, choosing HELP displays a Help screen for the displayed screen
 or dialog box. In this section, HELP is not included in discussions of menu
 items.

 The description of each command includes:

    ş   The command's purpose.

    ş   The menu or fields that appear when you choose the command.

 The order of the menus in this section is:

 Non-Service Menus

    ş   Main Screen Menu.

    ş   Local Filing Cabinet Menu.

    ş   Local In Basket Editor Menu.

    ş   Local Out Basket List Menu.

    ş   Local Out Basket Editor Menu.

    ş   Editor Menu.

    ş   Service Request Mgr Menu.

    ş   Service Response Menu.

 Service Menus

    ş   Main Screen Menu

    ş   Alert Menu.

    ş   Exchange Menu.

    ş   Exchange Editor Menu.

    ş   Service In Basket List Menu.

    ş   Service In Basket Editor Menu.

    ş   Service Out Basket List Menu.

    ş   Service Out Basket Editor Menu.

    ş   KnowledgeBase and Library Search Menus.

    ş   KnowledgeBase and Library Title List Menus.

    ş   KnowledgeBase and Library Editor Menus.


 Main Screen Menu  (Non-Service)

 If you press F1 when the Main Screen is displayed and you are
 disconnected from the Service, you see this menu:

      EDIT  BUSINESSTALK-INFO  ADDRESS-BOOKS  SET-UP  HELP  QUIT
      New, Open, Upload, Erase, Help

 EDIT

 Start a new document in the Microsoft OnLine editor, revise an existing
 document, upload a file from the disk to another subscriber, and erase a
 file on the disk. When you choose EDIT, you see this menu.

      NEW  OPEN  UPLOAD  ERASE  HELP
      Open a new document for the editor

 New
    Start a new document for editing. Microsoft OnLine displays a blank
    screen for you to compose your message.

 Open
    Open a document that you've previously created.

 Upload
    Select a disk file and address it to send as a message.

 Erase
    Select a disk file and erase it from the disk.

 ONLINE-INFO

     DOCUMENT  CLIENT-SERVICES  SYSTEM-REQUIREMENTS  THE-AUTHORS
     Key information about support and what info you need to help them

 Display information about Microsoft OnLine, including System requirements
 and where to call for Client Services Information. When you choose OnLine-
 INFO, you see this menu.

 Documents
    Display information about the Microsoft OnLine package and the
    conventions used in Help screens.

 Client-Services
    Display information about where to go for technical support and what
    information you should provide for technical support to solve your
    problem.

 System-Requirements
    Display what you need to run Microsoft OnLine.

 Other-Info
    Display a list of people who have authored Microsoft OnLine.

 ADDRESS-BOOKS

      PRINT  SAVE-ADDRESSES  IMPORT  PASTE  RESUME  HELP
      Print the current document on the printer

 Display the Local Address Book, where you store a list of your most
 frequently used addresses. Press F1 when the Local Address Book is
 displayed to display this menu.

 Print
    Print the Local Address Book on your printer. The selection for the
    printer is made in the ONLINE.INI file.

 Save-Addresses
    Save your Local Address Book to disk.

 Import
    Import a text file from your disk to your Local Address Book. Microsoft
    OnLine asks you to select the file and then reads it into the book.

 Paste
    Paste marked addresses from the Service Address Book into your Local
    Address Book.

 Resume
    Resume entering or editing text in your Local Address Book.

 SET-UP

      COMMUNICATIONS  PROFILE  QUICK-COMM-OPTIONS  KEYS  HELP
      Change access control information such as comm port, speed and address

 Set up Microsoft OnLine or change host communications, profile, and display
 options. You can also change the key used to display the menu. When you
 choose SET-UP, you see this menu.

 Communications
    Display the Communications Data dialog box, which you fill in to set
    System Access Number, System Password, Quick-Comm Address, the telephone
    number you dial to gain access to the Service, and the modem's
    communication port specification and baud rate.

 Profiles
    Display the Profile dialog box, where you select the disk and
    subdirectory for storing data files stored, the Sound ON/OFF toggle, and
    the Debug Trace ON/OFF toggle.

 Quik-Comm-Options
    Display the Display Options dialog box, where you select in what order
    the messages should be displayed. You can select LIFO (Last In First
    Out), where the last message is displayed at the top of the list. Or, you
    can select FIFO (First In First Out), where the messages are listed in
    chronological order. You can select either LIFO or FIFO for unread, read,
    or sent message lists.

 Keys
    Display the Command Key dialog box, where you choose which keystroke you
    want to display the menus. You can choose an ALT or CTRL key
    combination or a function key. You can't use ESC, ENTER, or an
    alphanumeric key to display the menus.

 QUIT

 Quit Microsoft OnLine and return to DOS.


 Local Filing Cabinet Menu (Non-Service)

 When you disconnect from the Service, open the In Basket Icon, and press
 F1, you see this menu.

      EDIT  OUTPUT  MOVE  COPY  ADD-LIST  DELETE  HELP  QUIT
      New, Open, Upload, Erase, Help

 EDIT

 Start a new document for editing, revise an existing document, upload a
 file from the disk to another subscriber, and erase a file on the disk. When
 you choose EDIT, you see another menu.

      EDIT  OPEN  UPLOAD  ERASE  HELP
      Open a new document for the editor

 New
    Start a new document to be edited. Microsoft OnLine displays a blank
    screen for you to compose your message.

 Open
    Open a document that you've previously created.

 Upload
    Select a disk file and address it to send as a message.

 Erase
    Select a disk file and erase it from the disk.

 OUTPUT

 Print or place in a file items that you receive from Microsoft OnLine. When
 you select OUTPUT, you see this menu.

      PRINTER  RECEIVE-FILE  HELP
      Turn the printer on, pulled decuments will be printed as received

 Printer
    Switch the printer connection ON or OFF. If you switch the printer ON, it
    will print items as they are received from Microsoft OnLine.

 Receive-File
    Switch the Receive file ON or OFF. If you switch the receive file ON,
    items are placed in that file as they are received from Microsoft OnLine.
    If more than one item is received, additional items are appended to the
    end of the file.

 MOVE

 Move items from one list to another.

 COPY

 Copy items from one list to another.

 ADD-LIST

 Add another list to your Local Filing Cabinet.

 DELETE

 Delete a list.

 QUIT

 Quit Microsoft OnLine and return to DOS.


 Local In Basket Editor Menu (Non-Service)

 If you selected an item in the In Basket list and then press ENTER to
 open the item, Microsoft OnLine displays the text of the item. If you press
 F1 and the item you opened is a message, you see this menu.

      PRINT  SAVE-ON-DISK  RESPOND  HELP  TO-SKIP-REMAINING
      Print the current document on the printer

 If the item you opened is from the Exchange, the Libraries, or the
 KnowledgeBase, RESPOND is not on the menu.

 PRINT

 Print the message on the printer attached to your computer.

 SAVE-ON-DISK

 Save the message to a disk file.

 RESPOND

 Respond to a message that someone else sent you.

 TO-SKIP-REMAINING

 If you open the In Basket, mark more than one item, and then select any
 command on this menu, such as SAVE-ON-DISK, you can cancel the rest of
 command action by choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING. Choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 will cancel the requested action, for example saving on disk or printing.


 Local Out Basket List Menu (Non-Service)

 When you are not connected to the Service, you see this menu if you open
 the Out Basket Icon and press F1. Use this menu only when the list of
 items in the Out Basket is displayed.

      EDIT  RE-ADDRESS  MODIFY-MESSAGE  CANCEL  HELP  QUIT
      New, Open, Upload, Erase, Help

 EDIT

 Start a new document to be edited, revise an existing document, upload a
 file from the disk to another subscriber, and erase a file on the disk. When
 you choose EDIT, you see this menu.

      NEW  OPEN  UPLOAD  ERASE  HELP
      Opens a new document for the editor

 New
    Start a new document to be edited. Microsoft OnLine displays a blank
    screen for you to compose your message.

 Open
    Open a document that you've previously created.

 Upload
    Select a disk file and address it to send as a message.

 Erase
    Select a disk file and erase it from the disk.

 RE-ADDRESS

 After you mark a message, you can re-address it by choosing RE-ADDRESS.
 Microsoft OnLine displays the Send dialog box, where you enter or change the
 address.

 MODIFY-MESSAGE

 After you mark a message, you can edit it by choosing MODIFY-MESSAGE.
 Microsoft OnLine displays the text of the message for you to edit. If you
 press F1 when the message is displayed, you see this menu.

      PRINT  BACK-IN-OUTBASKET  RESUME  HELP
      Print the current document on the printer

 Print
    Print the message on the printer attached to your computer.

 Back-In-Outbasket
    Place the edited message back into the Out Basket. You don't need to
    address the message again.

 Resume
    Return to the message for additional editing.

 CANCEL

 Delete a marked message or messages from the Out Basket.

 QUIT

 Quit Microsoft OnLine and return to DOS.


 Local Out Basket Editor Menu (Non-Service)

 If you select an item in the Out Basket list and press ENTER to open the
 item, Microsoft OnLine displays the text of the item. Then, if you press
 F1, you see this menu.

      PRINT  SAVE-ON-DISK  HELP  TO-SKIP-REMAINING
      Print the current document on the printer

 PRINT

 Prints the message on the printer attached to your computer.

 SAVE-ON-DISK

 Saves the message to a disk file.

 TO-SKIP-REMAINING

 If you open the Out Basket, mark more than one item, and then select any
 command on this menu, such as SAVE-ON-DISK, you can cancel the rest of
 command action by choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING. Choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 will cancel the requested action, for example saving on disk or printing.


 Editor Menu (Non-Service)

 When you open a message and press F1, you see this menu.

      RESUME  CLOSE  FILE  SEND  IMPORT  PASTE  HELP
      Resume editing the current document

 RESUME

 Return to the message for additional editing.

 CLOSE

 Close the message you're editing. If you haven't saved your changes,
 Microsoft OnLine asks whether you want to save them before closing the
 message.

 FILE

 When you choose FILE, Microsoft OnLine displays this menu:

      PRINT  SAVE-ON-DISK  HELP
      Print the current document on the printer

 Print
    Print the displayed message on the printer attached to your computer.

 Save-On-Disk
    Save the displayed message to a disk file.

 SEND

 Display the Send dialog box in order to  address your message. When
 Microsoft OnLine displays the Send dialog box, you see this menu.

      DROP-IN-OUTBASKET CLEAR-ADDRESSES  HELP
      Put this addressed message in Out Basket

 Drop-In-Outbasket
    Places your addressed message in the Out Basket for transmission next
    time you connect to the Service.

 Clear-Addresses
    Clears all addresses on the Send dialog box.

 IMPORT

 Import a file from your disk into your document. Microsoft OnLine prompts
 you for the name of the file.

 PASTE

 Paste marked text from another message into the current message.


 Service Request Mgr Menu (Non-Service)

 When you select the Service Request Mgr Icon and press F1, you see this
 menu.

      RESPONSES  CREATE  STATUS  DELETE  PRINT  UPDATE  EDITOR
      View Service Responses

 RESPONSES

 Display a list of Service Responses received from Microsoft.

 CREATE

 Create a new Service Request.

 STATUS

 Toggle the status (Unsent or Held) for all marked Service Requests.

 DELETE

 Delete all marked Service Requests.

 PRINT

 Print all marked Service Requests.

 UPDATE

 Edit the marked Service Request.

 EDITOR

 Starts the editor you specified in the ONLINE.INI file.


 Service Response Menu (Non-Service)

 When you select the Service Request Mgr Icon, press F1, and then choose
 RESPONSES from the menu, you see this menu.

      REQUESTS  DELETE  PRINT
      View Service Requests

 REQUESTS

 Display the list of Service Requests you have created.

 DELETE

 Delete all marked Service Responses.

 PRINT

 Print all marked Service Responses.


 Main Screen Menu (Service)

 If you are connected to the Service and press F1 from the Main Screen,
 you see this menu.

      EDIT  OUTPUT  CHANGE-PASSWORD  STATUS  ADDRESS-BOOKS  HELP  QUIT
      New, Open, Upload, Erase, Help

 EDIT

 Start a new document for the editor, revise an existing document, upload a
 file from the disk to another subscriber, and erase a file on the disk. When
 you choose EDIT, you see another menu.

      NEW  OPEN  UPLOAD  ERASE  HELP
      Open a new document for the editor

 New
    Start a new document to be edited. Microsoft OnLine displays a blank
    screen for you to compose your message.

 Open
    Open a document that you've previously created.

 Upload
    Select a disk file and address it to send as a message.

 Erase
    Select a disk file and erase it from the disk.

 OUTPUT

 Print or place in a file items that you receive from Microsoft OnLine. When
 you select OUTPUT, you see this menu.

      PRINTER  RECEIVE-FILE  HELP
      Turn the printer on, pulled documents will be printed as received

 Printer
    Switch the printer connection ON or OFF. If you switch the printer ON, it
    will print items as they are received from Microsoft OnLine.

 Receive-File
    Switch the Receive file ON or OFF. If you switch the receive file ON,
    items are placed in that file as they are received from Microsoft OnLine.
    If more than one item is received, additional items are appended to the
    end of the file.

 CHANGE-PASSWORD

 Display the Change Password dialog box, where you change your Quik-Comm
 Password.

 STATUS

 Display System communication status and information about your usage of the
 System. When you choose STATUS, you see this menu.

      COMMUNICATIONS  USAGE  HELP
      Display the current satus of the communications line

 Communications
    Display the last error code reported, the terminal ID number, and the
    number of line errors that occurred.

 Usage
    Display how much time you have spent connected to the Service. When you
    press F1, you see this menu.

      PRINT  SAVE-ON-DISK  HELP
      Print the current document on the printer

 Print
    Print the System usage information on the printer connected to your
    computer.

 Save-On-Disk
    Save the System usage information in the file you specify on your disk.

 ADDRESS-BOOKS

 Display another menu, where you select whether you want to work with the
 Local Address Book, search the Service Address Book for an address, or
 display a Help screen.

 Local
    Displays your local address book. When the Local Address Book is
    displayed and you press F1, you see this menu.

      PRINT  SAVE-ADDRESSES  PASTE  RESUME  HELP
      Print the current document on the printer

 Print
    Print the Local Address Book on the printer attached to your computer.

 Save-Addresses
    Save changes you made to the Local Address Book.

 Paste
    Paste marked addresses from the Service Address Book into your Local
    Address Book.

 Resume
    Continue working with your Local Address Book.

 Search
    Displays the Search dialog box used to search for a subscriber's address
    in the Service Address Book. You can enter your addresses in either
    upper- or lower-case letters.

      Search Type:  FIND-ANY  MATCH-ADDRESSES  EXACT  HELP
                    Search for match in address or description

 Find-Any
    Search for any subscriber addresses that match any part of the name you
    entered. Microsoft Online also searches the address comments.

 Match-Addresses
    Search for any subscriber addresses that matches the one you entered.
    When you choose MATCH-ADDRESSES, Microsoft OnLine searches only the
    subscribers' addresses; it does not search the address comments.

 Exact
    Search for the addresses and address comments that match the name you
    entered exactly.

 QUIT

 Quit Microsoft OnLine and return to DOS.


 Alert Menu (Service)

 When you open the Alert Icon and press F1, you see this menu.

      PRINT  SAVE-ON-DISK  HELP
      Print the current document on the printer

 PRINT

 Print the Alert Text on the printer connected to your computer.

 SAVE-ON-DISK

 Save the Alert Text to a file on your disk.


 Exchange List Menu (Service)

 When you open the Exchange Icon, Microsoft OnLine displays a list of items
 in the Exchange. When you press F1, you see this menu. If the <- points to
 a list item when you press F1, you see a subset of this menu.

      EDIT  OUTPUT  GET-ITEMS  REMOVE  HELP  QUIT
      Get desired items in the list

 EDIT

 Start a new document for the editor, revise an existing document, upload a
 file from the disk to another subscriber, and erase a file on the disk. When
 you choose EDIT, you see another menu.

      NEW  OPEN  UPLOAD  ERASE  HELP
      Open a new document for the editor

 New
    Start a new document in the Microsoft OnLine editor. Microsoft OnLine
    displays a blank screen for you to compose your message.

 Open
    Open a document that you've previously created.

 Upload
    Select a disk file and address it to send as a message.

 Erase
    Select a disk file and erase it from the disk.

 OUTPUT

 Use to indicate whether items will be printed or saved to a disk file when
 received. When you choose OUTPUT, you see this menu.

      PRINTER  RECEIVE-FILE  HELP
      Turn the printer on, pulled documents will be printed as received

 Printer
    Switch the printer ON or OFF. If you turn the printer ON, it will print
    items as they are received from Microsoft OnLine.

 Receive-File
    Switch the receive file ON or OFF. If you turn the receive file ON, items
    are placed in that file as they are received from Microsoft OnLine. If
    more than one item is received, the items are appended to the end of the
    file.

 GET-ITEMS

 Select options for receiving items. You can select which items to display,
 whether you want to receive files or documents or both, whether or not you
 want to stay connected to the Service after Microsoft OnLine retrieves the
 items, and other options.

 When you choose GET-ITEMS, Microsoft OnLine displays the Get Items dialog
 box:

      GET:   ALL  SELECTED
             Get all items in this list.

      GET:   FILES  DOCUMENTS  BOTH
             Retrieve files and documents

      After items have been retrieved:
      STAY-CONNECTED  DISCONNECT
      do not disconnect from host when done

      Should we save all retrieved items locally?
      SAVE-LOCALLY  DISPLAY-ONLY
      Save all items in a local list

      PRINT ITEMS AS RECEIVED:   YES  NO
                                 Do not print received items
                  YES  NO  HELP
      Continue?   Continue with retrieval

 Get All
    Retrieve all the items in the list.

 Get Selected
    Retrieve only those items in the list that you have marked with the + key
    on the numeric keypad.

 Get Files
    Retrieve only file items. When you select this option, Microsoft OnLine
    displays the Get Files dialog box after you finish selecting options on
    the Get Items dialog box. From the Get Files dialog box you choose an
    appropriate action if you download a file item that has the same name as
    a file on your disk. This dialog box has this menu:

      OVERWRITE  RENAME  ASK
      Overwrite the local file

      Overwrite
         Overwrite the file on the disk with the downloaded file.

      Rename
         Microsoft OnLine automatically generates a unique name for the
         downloaded file if it has the same name as a file on your disk.

      Ask
         Microsoft OnLine prompts you for a name for the downloaded file if
         it has the same name as a file on your disk.

 Get Documents
    Retrieve only text items.

 Get Both
    Retrieve both text and file items. See Get Files above for information
    about receiving file items.

 Stay-Connected
    Stay connected to the Service after retrieving the items.

 Disconnect
    Disconnect from the Service after retrieving the items.

 Save-Locally
    Save the retrieved items in your Local Filing Cabinet.

 Display-Only
    Display retrieved items on your screen. If you choose Display-Only, you
    can't save the retrieved items in your Local Filing Cabinet.

 Print Yes
    Print each item on the printer connected to your computer as the item is
    received.

 Print No
    Do not print each item on the printer.

 REMOVE

 Remove an item that you posted on the Exchange. You can't remove items that
 other subscribers post. Before you choose REMOVE, however, make certain you
 have marked the item you want to remove in the list. You can remove only one
 item at a time.

 QUIT

 Disconnect from the Service and return to DOS.


 Exchange Editor Menu (Service)

 When you open the Exchange Icon, Microsoft OnLine displays a list of items
 in the Exchange. When you move the <- to the right of the item you want and
 press ENTER, Microsoft OnLine displays the item or another list. Once you
 have a text item open, press F1 to see this menu.

      PRINT  SAVE-TO-DISK  ADD-TO-LOCAL  HELP  TO-SKIP-REMAINING
      Print the current document on the printer

 PRINT

 Print the item on your printer.

 SAVE-TO-DISK

 Save the item to a file on your disk.

 ADD-TO-LOCAL

 Add the text item on the display to your Local In Basket.

 TO-SKIP-REMAINING

 If you open the Exchange, mark more than one item, and then select any
 command on this menu, such as SAVE-ON-DISK, you can cancel the rest of
 command action by choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING. Choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 will cancel the requested action, for example saving on disk or printing.


 Service In Basket List Menu (Service)

 When you are connected to the Service, you see this menu when you open the
 In Basket Icon, open a text item, and press F1. If you open the In Basket
 Icon and press F1 without opening a text item, you see a subset of this
 menu.

      EDIT  OUTPUT  GET-ITEMS  RELEASE  FORWARD  WHO'S-READ  HELP  QUIT
      New, Open, Upload, Erase, Help

 EDIT

 Start a new document to be edited, revise an existing document, upload a
 file from the disk to another subscriber, and erase a file on the disk. When
 you choose EDIT, you see another menu.

      NEW  OPEN  UPLOAD  ERASE  HELP
      Open a new document for the editor

 New
    Start a new document to be edited. Microsoft OnLine displays a blank
    screen for you to compose your message.

 Open
    Open a document that you've previously created.

 Upload
    Select a disk file and address it to send as a message.

 Erase
    Select a disk file and erase it from the disk.

 OUTPUT

 Use to indicate whether items will be printed or saved to a disk file when
 received. When you choose OUTPUT, you see this menu.

      PRINTER  RECEIVE-FILE  HELP
      Turn the printer on, pulled documents will be printed as received

 Printer
    Switch the printer connection ON or OFF. If you turn the printer ON, it
    will print items as received from Microsoft OnLine.

 Receive File
    Switch the Receive file ON or OFF. If you turn the Receive file ON, items
    are placed in that file as they are received from Microsoft OnLine. If
    more than one item is received, additional items are appended to the end
    of the file.

 GET-ITEMS

 Select options for receiving items. You can select which items to display,
 whether you want to receive files or documents or both, whether or not you
 want to stay connected to the Service after Microsoft OnLine retrieves the
 items, and other options.

 When you choose GET-ITEMS, Microsoft OnLine displays the Get Items dialog
 box:

      GET:   ALL  SELECTED
             Get all items in this list.

      GET:   FILES  DOCUMENTS  BOTH
             Retrieve files and documents

      After items have been retrieved:
      STAY-CONNECTED  DISCONNECT
      do not disconnect from host when done

      Should we save all retrieved items locally?
      SAVE-LOCALLY  DISPLAY-ONLY
      Save all items in a local list

      PRINT ITEMS AS RECEIVED:   YES  NO
                                 Do not print received items
                  YES  NO  HELP
      Continue?   Continue with retrieval

 Get All
    Retrieve all the items in the incoming Quik-Comm list.

 Get Selected
    Retrieve only those items in the list that you have marked with the + key
    on the numeric keypad.

 Get Files
    Retrieve only file items. When you select this option, Microsoft OnLine
    displays the Get Files dialog box after you finish selecting options on
    the Get Items dialog box. From the Get Files dialog box you choose an
    appropriate action if you download a file item that has the same name as
    a file on your disk. This dialog box has this menu:

      OVERWRITE  RENAME  ASK
      Overwrite the local file

      Overwrite
         Overwrite the file on the disk with the downloaded file.

      Rename
         Microsoft OnLine automatically generates a unique name for the
         downloaded file if it has the same name as a file on your disk.

      Ask
         Microsoft OnLine prompts you for a name for the downloaded file if
         it has the same name as a file on your disk.

 Get Documents
    Retrieve only text items.

 Get Both
    Retrieve both text and file items. See Get Files above for information
    about receiving file items.

 Stay-Connected
    Stay connected to the Service after retrieving the items.

 Disconnect
    Disconnect from the Service after retrieving the items.

 Save-Locally
    Save the retrieved items in your Local Filing Cabinet.

 Display-Only
    Display retrieved items on your screen. If you choose Display-Only, you
    can't save the retrieved items in your Local Filing Cabinet.

 Print Yes
    Print each item on the printer connected to your computer as the item is
    received.

 Print No
    Do not print each item on the printer.

 RELEASE

 Delete a message from your In Basket list. If you've already read, printed,
 or saved a message to a file, you might want to delete it by choosing
 RELEASE. Once you've released the message, you can't recover it.

 FORWARD

 Use to forward a message you wrote to other users. When you choose FORWARD,
 Microsoft OnLine automatically displays the Forward dialog box, which
 contains this menu.

      FORWARD-NOW  CLEAR-ADDRESSES  HELP
      Forward this addressed message now

 Forward-Now
    After you've entered the names of users to whom you want to forward your
    message, choose FORWARD-NOW to send the message.

 Clear-Addresses
    Clear the address(es) on the Forward dialog box.

 WHO'S READ

 Display a list of who has read the message you sent.

 QUIT

 Quit Microsoft OnLine and return to DOS.


 Service In Basket Editor Menu (Service)

 When you are connected to the Service, you see this menu after you open the
 In Basket Icon, move the <- to open a message, and press ENTER. Then when
 you press F1, you see this menu.

      PRINT  SAVE-ON-DISK  RESPOND  HELP  TO-SKIP-REMAINING
      Print the current document on the printer

 PRINT

 Print the item on your printer.

 SAVE-TO-DISK

 Save the item to a file on your disk.

 RESPOND

 Respond quickly to a message. When you choose RESPOND, Microsoft OnLine
 displays a blank screen for you to compose your response. When you choose
 SEND, Microsoft OnLine displays the Send dialog box with the Subject and the
 To lines already filled in.

 ADD-TO-LOCAL

 Add the text item on the display to your Local In Basket.

 TO-SKIP-REMAINING

 If you open the In Basket, mark more than one item, and then select any
 command on this menu, such as SAVE-ON-DISK, you can cancel the rest of
 command action by choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING. Choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 cancels the requested action, for example saving on disk or printing.


 Service Out Basket List Menu (Service)

 When you are connected to the Service, open the Out Basket Icon, and press
 F1, you see this menu.

 EDIT  OUTPUT  RE-ADDRESS  MODIFY-MESSAGE  SEND-OUTBASKET  CANCEL  HELP  QUIT
 New, Open, Upload, Erase, Help

 EDIT

 Start a new document to be edited, revise an existing document, upload a
 file from the disk to another subscriber, and erase a file on the disk. When
 you choose EDIT, you see this menu.

      NEW  OPEN  UPLOAD  ERASE  HELP
      Open a new document for the editor

 New
    Start a new document to be edited. Microsoft OnLine displays a blank
    screen for you to compose your message.

 Open
    Open a document that you've previously created.

 Upload
    Select a disk file and address it to send as a message.

 Erase
    Select a disk file and erase it from the disk.

 OUTPUT

 Use to indicate whether items will be printed or saved to a disk file when
 received. When you choose OUTPUT, you see this menu.

      PRINTER  RECEIVE-FILE  HELP
      Turn the printer on, pulled documents will be printed as received

 Printer
    Switch the printer ON or OFF. If you turn the printer ON, it will print
    items as received from Microsoft OnLine.

 Receive-File
    Switch the Receive file ON or OFF. If you turn the receive file ON, items
    are placed in that file as they are received from Microsoft OnLine. If
    more than one item is received, additional items are appended to the end
    of the file.

 RE-ADDRESS

 Display the Send dialog box for the selected message so you can change the
 address.

 MODIFY-MESSAGE

 Display the text of the message for you to edit.

 SEND-OUTBASKET

 Transmit the contents of the Out Basket. When you choose SEND-OUTBASKET,
 you see this menu.

      ALL  SELECTED  HELP
      Send all Quik-Comms waiting to be sent in the outbasket

 All
    Transmit all the messages in the Out Basket.

 Selected
    Transmits only those messages you selected.

 After you choose ALL or SELECTED, Microsoft OnLine displays a dialog box
 with these options.

      Send Options:  STAY-CONNECTED  DISCONNECT  HELP
                     do not disconnect from host when done

      Stay-Connected
         Stay connected to the Service after transmitting the messages in the
         Out Basket.

      Disconnect
         Disconnect from the Service after transmitting the messages in the
         Out Basket.

 CANCEL

 Delete a message. Move the <- to the right of the message you want to
 delete and choose CANCEL.

 QUIT

 Disconnect from the Service and return to DOS.


 Service Out Basket Editor Menu (Service)

 When you are connected to the Service, open the Out Basket Icon, move the
 <- to choose a message, press ENTER, and then press F1 to see this
 menu.

      PRINT  SAVE-ON-DISK  HELP  TO-SKIP-REMAINING
      Print the current document on the printer

 PRINT

 Print the item on your printer.

 SAVE-TO-DISK

 Save the item to a file on your disk.

 TO-SKIP-REMAINING

 If you open the Out Basket, mark more than one item, and then select any
 command on this menu, such as SAVE-ON-DISK, you can cancel the rest of
 command action by choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING. Choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING
 cancels the requested action, for example saving on disk or printing.


 KnowledgeBase and Library Search Menus (Service)

 When you select the KnowledgeBase or Library Icons, Microsoft OnLine
 automatically displays the Search dialog box, which has the following menu
 items.

      BEGIN-SEARCH  DISPLAY-TITLES  TOPICS  SEARCH-HINTS  HELP
      Search the library with the criteria specified

 BEGIN-SEARCH

 Start the search based on the search criteria you entered.

 DISPLAY-TITLES

 Display a list of titles that match your search criteria. You must first
 search for the items with BEGIN-SEARCH and wait for Microsoft OnLine to
 display the number of matching items before choosing DISPLAY-TITLES.

 TOPICS

 Display general topics contained in the KnowledgeBase or Libraries.

 SEARCH-HINTS

 Display specific hints on optimizing your searches.


 KnowledgeBase and Library Title List Menus (Service)

 After you've entered your search criteria, begun the search, and chosen
 DISPLAY-TITLES, Microsoft OnLine displays a list of titles that match your
 criteria. Once this list is displayed, press F1 to see this menu.

      EDIT  OUTPUT  GET-ITEMS  HELP  RESPECIFY-SEARCH
      New, Open, Upload, Erase, Help

 EDIT

 Start a new document to be edited, revise an existing document, upload a
 file from the disk to another subscriber, and erase a file on the disk. When
 you choose EDIT, you see this menu.

      NEW  OPEN  UPLOAD  ERASE  HELP
      Open a new document for the editor

 New
    Start a new document to be edited. Microsoft OnLine displays a blank
    screen for you to compose your message.

 Open
    Open a document that you've previously created.

 Upload
    Select a disk file and address it to send as a message.

 Erase
    Select a disk file and erase it from the disk.

 OUTPUT

 Use to indicate whether received items will be printed or saved to a disk
 file. When you choose OUTPUT, you see this menu.

      PRINTER  RECEIVE-FILE  HELP
      Turn the printer on, pulled documents will be printed as received

 Printer
    Switch the printer ON or OFF. If you turn the printer ON, it will print
    items as received from Microsoft OnLine.

 Receive-File
    Switch the Receive file ON or OFF. If you turn the receive file ON, items
    are placed in that file as they are received from Microsoft OnLine. If
    more than one item is received, the items are appended to the end of the
    file.

 GET-ITEMS

 Select options for receiving items. You can select which items to display,
 whether you want to receive files or documents or both, whether you want to
 stay connected to the Service after Microsoft OnLine retrieves the items,
 and other options.
 When you choose GET-ITEMS, Microsoft OnLine displays the Get Items dialog
 box:

      GET:   ALL  SELECTED
             Get all items in this list.

      GET:   FILES  DOCUMENTS  BOTH
             Retrieve files and documents

      After items have been retrieved:
      STAY-CONNECTED  DISCONNECT
      do not disconnect from host when done

      Should we save all retrieved items locally?
      SAVE-LOCALLY  DISPLAY-ONLY
      Save all items in a local list

      PRINT ITEMS AS RECEIVED:   YES  NO
                                 Do not print received items
                  YES  NO  HELP
      Continue?   Continue with retrieval

 Get All
    Retrieve all the items in the incoming Quik-Comm List.

 Get Selected
    Retrieve only those items in the list that you have marked with the + key
    on the numeric keypad.

 Get Files
    OnLine displays the Get Files dialog box after you finish selecting
    options on the Get Items dialog box. From the Get Files dialog box you
    choose an appropriate action if you download a file item that has the
    same name as a file on your disk. This dialog box has this menu:

      OVERWRITE  RENAME  ASK
      Overwrite the local file

      Overwrite
         Overwrite the file on the disk with the downloaded file.

      Rename
         Microsoft OnLine automatically generates a unique name for the
         downloaded file if it has the same name as a file on your disk.

      Ask
         Microsoft OnLine prompts you to type a name for the downloaded file
         if it has the same name as a file on your disk.

 Get Documents
    Retrieve only text items.

 Get Both
    Retrieve both text and file items. See Get Files above for important
    information about receiving file items.

 Stay-Connected
    Stay connected to the Service, after retrieving the items.

 Disconnect
    Disconnect from the Service after retrieving the items.

 Save-Locally
    Save the retrieved items in your Local Filing Cabinet.

 Display-Only
    Display retrieved items on your screen. If you choose Display-Only, you
    can't save the retrieved items in your Local Filing Cabinet.

 Print Yes
    Print each item on the printer connected to your computer as the item is
    received.

 Print No
    Do not print each item on the printer.

 RESPECIFY-SEARCH

 Display the Search dialog box again so you can enter your search criteria
 again.


 KnowledgeBase and Library Editor Menus (Service)

 Once you've selected an item from the KnowledgeBase or Library lists by
 moving the <- to the right of the item you want and pressing ENTER,
 Microsoft OnLine displays the item or another list. After you  open a text
 item, press F1 to see this menu.

      PRINT  SAVE-TO-DISK  ADD-TO-LOCAL  HELP  TO-SKIP-REMAINING
      Print the current document on the printer

 PRINT

 Print the item on your printer.

 SAVE-TO-DISK

 Save the item to a file on your disk. Microsoft OnLine prompts you for a
 filename.

 ADD-TO-LOCAL

 Add the displayed text item to your Local In Basket.

 TO-SKIP-REMAINING

 If you mark more than one item and then select any command on this menu,
 such as SAVE-ON-DISK, you can cancel the rest of command action by choosing
 TO-SKIP-REMAINING. Choosing TO-SKIP-REMAINING will cancel the requested
 action, for example saving on disk or printing.


 Appendix A.  Microsoft OnLine Messages
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Message codes range from 1 - 9399 and are divided into the following
 general categories:

     Message Codes            Category

     0 - 99                   General recoverable errors

     100 - 199                Database recoverable errors

     200 - 299                Bulletin board recoverable errors

     300 - 399                Electronic Mail recoverable errors

     400 - 412                ELU  (Enhanced Logon Utility) processing
                              errors

     500 - 520                Transport Layer Protocol errors

     600 - 611                Errors while processing logon dialog

     700 - 899                Application level software errors

     4001 - 4113              B-Tree file access errors

     5000 - 5999              GELIB communications subroutines errors 6000 -
                              6999  GELIB file system subroutines errors

     9000 - 9399              Fatal Errors

 The terms B-TREE and GELIB are used in many of the messages. B-TREE is a
 database manager used in the microcomputer version of the System. GELIB is a
 Fortran subroutine Library developed by General Electric Information
 Services Company.

 If Microsoft OnLine displays an error message that you do not understand or
 if the message is a fatal error (9000 - 9399), record the message, error
 code number, and the task you were trying to complete. Then give this
 information to your Microsoft System Administrator for assistance.

 Microsoft OnLine has unique messages for most conditions. However, it is
 possible that an unknown error may occur. In this case, Microsoft OnLine
 will display a default message, shown below, that reports the error code.
 Please record the message,  code number, and the task you were trying to
 complete. Then take this information to your Microsoft System Administrator
 for assistance.

 The default error message is:

    AN ERROR HAS OCCURRED

        Error code  NNNN

    No information on this error is available in the database

 In this section the message code number is in bold face type, the message
 is in italic type, and the description and possible solution(s) are in
 normal type.

 Message Codes 0 - 99

 0         There is insufficient memory to run one of the Service Request
           Modules.

 2         Your new Password contains invalid characters or is the wrong
           length.
           The new Password you entered on the Change Password dialog box is
           not valid.

 3         Your old Password is not a valid one.
           The old Password on the Change Password dialog box is not valid.

 4         The News file cannot be found.
           The server could not open the file that contains the Alert
           message.

 5         You cannot change your Password at this time. Please try later.
           The Microsoft OnLine system is too busy to process a Password
           change request.

 6         Your abort has been acknowledged.
           You interrupted a transaction or file transfer by pressing the ESC
           key.

 8         There is insufficient memory to run one of the Service Request
           Modules.

 (46,0)    There is insufficient memory to run one of the Service Request
           Modules.


 Message Codes 100 -199

 101       The search criteria is not valid.
           You entered text on a search dialog box that was too vague for a
           search. Enter more specific criteria.

 102       No database is open.
           Indicates a serious problem with a Library because the Library
           closed abnormally while in use.

 103       A text database search found too many matches and overflowed the
           buffer.

 105       The spool ended unexpectedly.
           The system cannot find the titles of all documents it found during
           the search.

 106       You do not have access to this database.
           You selected a Library icon, but the Microsoft System
           Administrator has not allowed you to have access to this Library.

 107       The database cannot be opened because of security problems.
           The database does not have the correct access or you have the
           wrong access permissions.

 108       The attached disk file cannot be opened.
           A file in the Library could not be opened.

 125       An invalid HSSTRING command in the BT50.ZIF file resulted in an
           attempt to invoke a non-existent Service process.


 Message Codes 200 - 299

 201       A System error prevented the recognition of the bulletin board ID.
           Please consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report
           this as #201.
           The bulletin board files could not be opened, or you do not have
           the necessary permissions.

 202       A System error prevented the recognition of the bulletin board ID.
           Please consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report
           this as #202.
           During a bulletin board POST operation, the bulletin board ID
           supplied by the microcomputer was invalid or you do not have the
           necessary permissions.

 203       No more notices can be posted to this bulletin board.
           The bulletin board is full.

 204       A notice can be deleted only by its owner.
           You tried to remove a notice that someone else posted.

 205       You cannot post to a NEW information folder.
           You tried to post something to the new information list for the
           current bulletin board.

 207       You cannot delete a list.
           You tried to remove an item from a bulletin board which represents
           a list of other items on the bulletin board.

 209       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #209.
           The server could not post the item you sent or could not remove
           the item you requested.

 210       The notice you want to post is empty.
           You tried to post an empty document to the bulletin board.


 Message Codes 300 - 399

 301       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #301.
           A problem occurred with Electronic Mail while sending a message.
           This problem occurred after the address check.

 302       Your message was not sent to all TO and/or CC's addresses.
           Forward or send failed due to a combination of errors.

 304       The attached disk file was not received by the Service.
           The server couldn't attach the binary file to the Electronic Mail
           Message.

 305       Not all messages were canceled or released.
           The Electronic Mail Message  cancel failed because of a System
           error.

 306       The message is busy. Please try this transaction again in a while.
           You tried to view a message currently being read by another
           subscriber.

 308       There is no room to post any more messages to this user.
           You tried to send a message to a subscriber whose message list is
           full.

 309       A message can be sent to no more than 50 addresses or groups with
           an upper limit of 600 addresses.
           You tried to send a message to some combination of individual
           and/or group addresses that represent more than 600 individual
           addresses.

 310       A message line cannot have more than 158 characters.
           Your message had at least one line containing more than 158
           characters. Your data was probably corrupted during transmission.

 312       Your message is missing text lines or addresses.
           Your message was received by the Service, but the message was
           missing required addresses or text. This message represents a
           serious communications or System error.

 313       The host's workload has prevented your message being sent to all
           addresses. Please consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and
           report this as #313.
           The network load interfered with sending a message. Try again at
           another time, but be sure to tell the Microsoft System
           Administrator about this error message.

 314       The listed item status has not been updated. This item will appear
           as unread the next time you use the In Basket.
           A System error prevented normal updating of a message status.

 315       The listed item status has not been updated. This item will appear
           as unread the next time you use the In Basket.
           A System error prevented normal updating of a message hold
           status.

 316       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #316.
           The format of your message was bad and your message was probably
           garbled during transmission. Try again.

 317       You did not send this message. Microsoft OnLine cannot let you
           cancel it.
           You tried to cancel a message that you did not originally send.

 318       The host's workload prevented your message being sent to all
           addresses.
           The message was not forwarded because the system was too busy. Try
           again later.


 Message Codes 400 - 499

 400       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #400.
           Internal error in ELU file. Try again.

 401 or    The ESC or CTRL+BREAK you entered has interrupted

 402       the logon procedure.
           You interrupted the logon procedure by pressing CTRL+C,
           CTRL+BREAK, or ESC.

 404       There is a syntax error in your dialog file. Check the file
           "errfile'"on your current drive for more information about this
           error.
           The LOGON.DIA or LOGOFF.DIA files used by the program contain
           invalid enhanced logon utility commands.

 405       During dialog processing an expected response from the Service was
           not received. Try to make this connection again, or please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #405.
           Data received from the Service during connection or disconnection
           did not match a value specified in an ELU dialog WAITFOR
           statement.

 406       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #406.
           The port number supplied by the program to ELU routines was not
           valid on your machine. Either you selected  an incorrect serial
           port option, or a serious internal error on your microcomputer has
           occurred.

 407       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #407.
           Missing Value expected by ELU was not supplied by the
           microcomputer program. Either you have incorrectly constructed a
           dialog file or a serious internal error on your microcomputer has
           occurred.

 408       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #408.
           Missing Value string supplied to the ELU routine by the
           microcomputer program was too long. This error probably indicates
           a serious internal data error on your microcomputer.

 409       The dialog file was not found. Please be sure that the file
           LOGON.DIA is on the same drive and in the same subdirectory that
           contains the program files to run Microsoft OnLine.
           When you tried to connect to the Service, neither the file
           LOGON.DIA or LOGON.DIX could be found.

 410       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #410.
           There are more than 128 lines of data in the dialog files
           LOGON.DIA if you were connecting to the Service, or LOGOFF.DIA if
           you were disconnecting from the Service.

 411       The executable form of your dialog file is not a valid one. Try
           erasing the file LOGON.DIX or LOGOFF.DIX. Please consult your
           OnLine representative and report this as #411.
           The compiled dialog file has been corrupted. The file is LOGON.DIX
           if you were connecting to the Service, or LOGOFF.DIX if you were
           disconnecting from the Service.

 412       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #412.
           Microsoft OnLine encountered an unknown error while processing the
           ELU dialog file (LOGON.DIA/DIX or LOGOFF.DIA/DIX).


 Message Codes 500 - 599

 501       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #501.
           Invalid Class byte in TLP packet. There is probably an internal
           error in your microcomputer.

 502       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #502.
           The microcomputer program in a call to the TLP SYSNSET routine
           found an invalid value. This message indicates the presence of an
           invalid value in the LOGON or LOGOFF dialog files.

 504       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #504.
           Non-empty DEM buffer, which is a serious internal error on the
           microcomputer that ends the program. You must restart Microsoft
           OnLine.

 505       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #505.
           Unable to receive data packet in TLP (SYNGET), which is a serious
           internal error that ends the program. This is a communications
           protocol failure that is possible due to excessive line noise. You
           must restart Microsoft OnLine.

 506       Error-free protocol timed out in attempting to send or receive
           data.
           Unable to send regular data packet, which ends the microcomputer
           program. You must restart Microsoft OnLine.

 507       Error-free protocol timed out in attempting to send or receive
           data.
           Unable to send DEM command, which ends the microcomputer program.
           You must restart Microsoft OnLine.

 508       Error-free protocol timed out in attempting to send or receive
           data.
           Failed to receive data in DEM mode, which ends the microcomputer
           program. You must restart Microsoft OnLine.

 510       Error-free protocol timed out in attempting to send or receive
           data.
           Unable to transmit data in buffered mode.

 511       Error-free protocol timed out in attempting to send or receive
           data.
           Communications failure waiting for DEM command.

 512       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #512.
           Invalid data passed to TLP routines by microcomputer program,
           which is a serious internal data error that ends the program.

 513       A communications line-drop has disrupted and canceled your on-line
           session.
           An error occurred that broke the communications line to the
           Service.

 514       The CTRL+BREAK you entered will end your connection to the
           System.
           You interrupted the communication session by typing CTRL+BREAK
           and Microsoft OnLine will disconnect you from the Service.

 515       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #515.
           The data packet received from the Service was too long. There was
           an internal error in the server or microcomputer, which ends the
           program.

 516       Error-free protocol timed out in attempting to send or receive
           data.
           The attempt to send a line break failed.

 517       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #517.
           Unable to receive DEM data packet, which ends the program.


 Message Codes 600 - 699

 600       A System error occurred while connecting your modem.
           The program could not initialize the selected communications port
           on your computer (COM1: or COM2:).

 601       The U#= prompt was not received from the Mark III.
           The LOGON dialog timed out waiting for U#= from the Mark III
           Service.

 602       The System is not available at this time. Please make sure your
           System Access Number is correct and try again.
           The LOGON dialog received System Unavailable instead of the P=
           prompt from the server.

 603       Your System Access Number or Password may be incorrect. Please
           check both of these and try again.
           The LOGON dialog received Validation Fault instead of the P=
           prompt from the server.

 604       The Quik-Comm System is not hooked up correctly. Please check your
           connection parameters and try again.
           The LOGON dialog received Quik-Comm Unavailable after sending the
           server connection information.

 605       You are using an old version of software. Please consult your
           OnLine representative and report this as #605.
           The LOGON dialog received Bad Version after sending Quik-Comm
           Address and Password and the microcomputer program version to the
           server.

 606       The Quik-Comm Address you entered is already being used by someone
           else.
           The LOGON dialog received  In Use after sending the Quik-Comm
           Address.

 607       The Quik-Comm Address or Password entered may be incorrect. Please
           check both of these and try again.
           The LOGON dialog received Invalid Quik-Comm ID after sending the
           Quik-Comm ID.

 608       The International System is not hooked up correctly. Please check
           your connection parameters and try again.
           The LOGON dialog received International System Unavailable after
           sending the connection information to the server.

 609       The Quik-Comm Address you entered is out of time. Please check
           your Communication Parameters and try again.
           The LOGON dialog received Out of Time after sending the Quik-Comm
           address, program, and microcomputer program version to the
           server.

 610       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #610.
           The LOGON dialog received Fatal Error Preparing System after
           sending the Quik-Comm Address, program, and microcomputer program
           version to the server.

 611       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #611.
           The LOGON dialog timed out waiting for System Ready from the
           server.


 Message Codes 700 - 799

 701       The current document is empty, so there is nothing to print or
           file.
           You chose FILE from the EDIT menu when there is nothing in the
           document.

 703       No document has been marked, so there is nothing to paste.
           You choose PASTE from the EDIT menu without previously marking a
           portion of another document to paste.

 704       Only text file can be edited. The file you tried to edit has an
           extension  that is one of the following: .OBJ  .LIB  .EXE   .COM.
           You tried to open a non-text file for editing.

 705       The document you requested is not available.
           The server couldn't find a document on the Service that appeared
           in a list displayed on your computer.

 708       There is no room left to store the incoming list of document.
           The system memory area used for lists is full.

 709       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your OnLine representative and report this as #709.
           There was an error accessing the configuration file BTCONFIG.

 710       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #710.
           Did not receive valid STATS transaction after starting server and
           protocol.

 711       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #711.
           Valid COUNT transaction was not received while waiting.

 712       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #712.
           The number of available services defined by the Service exceeds
           the capacity of you computer (greater than 50 services).

 713       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #713.
           Error writing to communications trace file.

 714       The configuration file (BTCONFIG) is causing a System error.
           Please consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report
           this as #714.
           A CRC (Cyclic Redundancy Check) on the configuration file failed.
           The file is corrupted and must be reinstalled.

 715       All of the file will not fit in the edit buffer.
           The disk file you want to open or import is too large to fit in
           the editor's workspace.

 716       Before you can save this file you need to give it a name.
           You have not entered a filename on the Save As dialog box.

 717       There is not enough space on your disk. You can swap in another
           disk that has more free space, or delete unneeded files from this
           disk.
           The disk on which you are trying to save your document is full.

 718       All of the marked lines will not fit into the edit buffer.
           The block of text you are trying to PASTE into the current
           document will cause the editor's buffer to overfill.

 719       There is no document to file.
           You have tried to file the contents of the editor's workspace when
           it is empty.

 720       The Address Book will not fit in the edit buffer.
           The Local Address Book has become too large to fit into the
           editor's workspace.

 724       Only ten levels of bulletin boards are allowed. You can get
           documents from an existing bulletin board list, but you cannot
           open the next list.
           The bulletin board hierarchy contains more levels than are
           supported by the microcomputer.

 725       The Service cannot complete the transaction.
           In XACTION, the translation of Get All to Get This failed, which
           caused an internal system data error.

 726       The transaction from the Service cannot be read.
           The value of the starting position for parsing a transaction from
           the packet buffer exceeds the pack length, which caused an
           internal data error.

 727       The transaction from the Service is not recognized.
           An unexpected transaction code was received from the Service.

 728       The Service cannot recognize the transaction.
           The microcomputer sent an invalid transaction code to the server.

 729       The transaction was not completed.
           There was a general error in XACTION and the processing of the
           current transaction failed.

 730       This transaction cannot be sent to the Service.
           The transaction requested by the caller is not the XACTION table
           of valid transactions, which caused an internal system data
           error.

 731       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #731.
           The maximum number of items that can be contained in the LIST
           storage area has been exceeded.

 732       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #732.
           The area of memory for storing lists is full.

 733       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #733.
           The item number of data in the LIST data store is invalid, which
           caused an internal system data error.

 734       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #734.
           The size of the file description record for the directory manager
           is invalid, which caused an internal system data error.

 735       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #735.
           The conversion of file size from string to integer for the
           Directory Manager failed, which caused an internal system data
           error.

 743       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #743.
           You tried to save an empty address book.

 744       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #744.
           There was an error writing a marked block to the editor's scratch
           file.

 745       The editor buffer is now full.
           The editor's workspace is full. You cannot enter any more text
           without deleting some first.

 746       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #746.
           An error occurred while uploading the disk file header to the
           Service Bulletin Board.

 747       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #747.
           An error occurred while uploading a binary file to the Service
           Bulletin Board.

 748       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #748.
           An error occurred while preparing to send a binary file header to
           the Quik-Comm System.

 749       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #749.
           An error occurred while uploading a binary file header to the
           Quik-Comm System.

 750       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #750.
           An error occurred while uploading a binary file header to the
           Quik-Comm System.

 751       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #751.
           An error occurred while uploading a binary file to the Quik-Comm
           System.

 755       Only the owner of the item can remove it from the bulletin board,
           and you are not the owner.
           You tried to remove an item from the Exchange that you didn't
           post.

 756       You are not listed as having any services. Please consult your
           Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #756.
           The list of available services sent by the Service during the
           LOGON dialog was empty.

 757       A record that was transmitted had to be shortened to fit in
           available memory. Please consult your Microsoft Online
           representative and report this as #757.
           A data record passed to XMITBUF routine exceeds the maximum size
           allowed, which caused an internal system data error.

 758       You pressed the ESC key. Are you sure you want to abort the
           current file transfer?
           You pressed ESC during a file transfer.

 759       Your old Password was not recognized. Please try again.
           The current Quik-Comm Password you entered when you tried to
           change your Password was not correct.

 760       The two entries of the new Password do not agree.
           The two New Password entries you entered to change your Password
           are not the same.

 762       Your computer is not of the type designated to receive this file.
           You selected a file from a list, but the source of the file is not
           another microcomputer.

 763       Help cannot be provided because no information is available yet in
           the Help file (BT.HLP). Report this as #763.
           You requested help, but Microsoft OnLine couldn't find the Help
           file.

 764       Help cannot be provided because no information is available yet in
           the Help file (BT.HLP). Report this as #764.
           There is a missing Help screen in the Help file. The database is
           probably loaded incorrectly. Consult your Microsoft OnLine
           representative.

 765       Help cannot be provided because something is wrong with the Help
           file. Please consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and
           report this as #765.
           There was a DOS file error accessing the Help file.

 795       The message file on disk for the Out Basket message was not found.
           Report this as #795.
           You selected an item from the list of Quik-Comm Messages waiting
           to be sent, but the corresponding message file could not be
           found.

 801       The address file on disk for the Out Basket message was not found.
           Report this as #801.
           The address file for the Quik-Comm Message waiting to be sent
           could not be found.

 849       The address file is missing. (It may be on a different disk.)
           The address file for a Quik-Comm Message waiting to be sent could
           not be found after you chose RE-ADDRESS.

 850       You must supply an address, or the operation cannot be completed.
           You did not enter any address when you tried to FORWARD a
           message.

 853       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #853.
           There was an error reading the address file for the message after
           you chose RE-ADDRESS.

 855       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #855.
           A record size error occurred while reading an Out Basket list from
           the disk.

 857       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #857.
           An error occurred while reading data from the configuration file.

 860       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #860.
           An error occurred while accessing the Out Basket list to update
           the list after you chose RE-ADDRESS or MODIFY-MESSAGE.

 862       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #862.
           An internal System data error occurred while processing an icon
           pointer for the Main Screen.

 863       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #863.
           An internal System data error occurred while processing an invalid
           menu option selection on the Main Screen.

 864       A System error prevented the display of this form. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #864.
           An error occurred while retrieving a dialog box definition from
           the database.

 865       A System error prevented the display of this menu. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #865.
           An error occurred while trying to find the menu definition in the
           database.

 866       A System error prevented the display of this menu. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #866.
           The menu record from the database is too large to fit into
           allocated memory.

 867       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #867.
           You failed to enter at least one address on the Address dialog box
           when sending a Quik-Comm Message.

 868       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #868.
           You tried to post an empty message to the Exchange.

 869       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #869.
           You tried to post an item to the New Information list or another
           invalid Exchange location.

 870       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #870.
           The start-of-text record for a binary file header was not found
           when trying to download the file.

 871       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #871.
           An error occurred while writing to the Out Basket list file.

 872       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #872.
           An internal System memory or database error occurred because the
           maximum number of strings allowed in the system static string pool
           has been exceeded.

 873       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #873.
           An internal System memory or database error occurred because the
           maximum number of characters allocated for the system static
           string pool has been exceeded.

 874       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #874.
           An internal System data error occurred while retrieving the
           requested string from the system static string pool.

 875       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #875.
           The maximum number of Out Basket items waiting to be sent has been
           exceeded. You need to SEND or CANCEL messages; otherwise, an
           internal System data error will occur.

 876       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #876.
           The window buffer has become full.

 877       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #877.
           An internal system data error occurred because too many windows
           have been opened.

 878       A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #878.
           An internal System data error occurred when you tried to close a
           window when there weren't any windows open.

 879       You have entered the maximum number of addresses for this list.
           You tried to enter more than 50 addresses on either the TO or CC
           lines in the Address dialog box.

 880       There is not enough room in the current address list to include
           all the addresses you have selected.
           You have selected more addresses from the Local Address Book than
           will fit in the remaining space in the TO or CC lines on the
           Address dialog box.

 881       If you respond YES to SAVE, then you must specify a filename in
           which to save the data.
           You didn't enter a filename on the Save-As dialog box.

 882       All of the fields marked REQUIRED are essential for connecting to
           the Service, and must be filled in before attempting to save the
           data and leave the form.
           You didn't enter data into a required field on the Communications
           dialog box.

 883       The Data Location is REQUIRED to know where to put the Address
           Book and mail. Once defined, great care should be taken in
           changing the value, since the program can become confused as to
           where to find your data.
           You didn't enter data into a required field on the Profile dialog
           box.

 884       You cannot perform this action on the Quick-Comm Already Read
           List.
           You made a selection from the In Basket menu while pointing at the
           Quik-Comm Already Read List.

 885       You must specify your Quik-Comm Password if you wish to connect to
           the Service.
           You didn't enter your Quik-Comm Password on the Connect to Service
           dialog box.


 Message Codes 900 - 999

 900       This file is already open as the receive file.

 901       Too many icon records in database to fit in the program's array
           (routine BLDICON).

 902       A Service-defined form is trying to be processed, but the form
           number is less than the minimum 10000.

 910       The Service was unable to start the application you requested.
           Either the program did not exist, or it was impossible to access
           it or the user number.

 911       The microcomputer program to execute, as specified by the Service,
           could not be found.

 912       The file necessary to restart Microsoft OnLine from your last
           session could not be found.

 913       The file necessary to restart Microsoft OnLine from your last
           session could not be opened.

 914       The file necessary to restart Microsoft OnLine from your last
           session could not be read.

 915       A failure occurred trying to chain to your other microcomputer
           program.

 916       An icon definition in your .ZIF file tried to access a non-
           existent picture.

 917       There is an icon definition with a bad format in your .ZIF file.


 Message Codes 4001 - 4999

 4001      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4001.
           An internal System error occurred when trying to open one of the
           three B-TREE files: BT.DBF, BT.HLP, or OBLIST.LST.

 4020      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4020.
           An internal System error occurred when an item required by the
           program could not be located in its B-TREE file. Possibly the
           database is corrupted.

 4021      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4021.
           An internal System error occurred in the Out Basket list file
           (OBLIST.LST) when the program tried to create a new B-TREE record
           that has the same key as an existing one.

 4022      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4022.
           An internal System error occurred when the program found the end
           of the database file when trying to retrieve an item. Possibly the
           database is corrupted.

 4082      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4082.
           An internal System error occurred when the program tried to
           retrieve an item from a B-TREE file that is not open.

 4102      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4102.
           An internal System error occurred when the program specified an
           invalid unit when accessing a B-TREE file.

 4104      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4104.
           An internal System error occurred because there wasn't buffer
           space available for a B-TREE file operation.

 4105      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4105.
           An internal System error occurred because the program tried a
           B-TREE operation on a non-B-TREE file.

 4106      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4106.
           An error occurred when the program tried to open a B-TREE file
           that couldn't be found. Possibly the software is not installed
           correctly on your computer.

 4107      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4107.
           An error occurred when the program tried to create a B-TREE file
           with the same name as an existing one. Possibly the Out Basket
           list is corrupted, the software is not installed correctly on your
           computer, or you changed the Data Location field on the Profile
           dialog box.

 4108      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4108.
           An internal System error occurred when there was an invalid record
           length for a B-TREE file. Possibly the B-TREE data base is
           corrupted or obsolete.

 4110      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4110.
           An internal System error occurred during record retrieval when the
           physical record size did not match the value expected by the
           program. Possibly an invalid B-TREE file.

 4112      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4112.
           An internal System error occurred when the program tried to access
           a B-TREE file, but the length of the file is not valid.

 4113      A System error prevented the completion of this activity. Please
           consult your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as
           #4113.
           An internal System error occurred when the program tried to
           reallocate B-TREE buffers.


 Message Codes 5000 - 5999

 5010      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5010.
           GELIB: Invalid communications port.

 5020      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5020.
           GELIB: Time out on write to communications line.

 5030      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5030.
           GELIB: Time out on read from communications line.

 5040      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5040.
           GELIB: Time out, outgoing data under flow control.

 5050      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5050.
           GELIB: Modem error on write to communications line.

 5060      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5060.
           GELIB: Modem error on read from communications line.

 5070      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5070.
           GELIB: Invalid queue size on COPEN.

 5080      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5080.
           GELIB: Flow control ON error.

 5090      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5090.
           GELIB: Communications line queue overflow.

 5100      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5100.
           GELIB: Port not open.

 5110      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5110.
           GELIB: Port already open.

 5120      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5120.
           GELIB: Invalid RS-232C card.

 5130      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5130.
           GELIB: Illegal baud rate.

 5140      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5140.
           GELIB: Illegal parity code.

 5150      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5150.
           GELIB: Illegal stop code.

 5160      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5160.
           GELIB: Comm IRQ Server error.

 5170      A communications error has occurred. If the problem persists,
           please report this error to your Microsoft OnLine representative.
           Report this as #5170.
           GELIB: Invalid value number in CCHG call.

 5560      The time limit for a LOGON or LOGOFF dialog file set with the
           TIMEOUT command expired before the modem responded.


 Message Codes 6000 - 6999

 6010      The filename is ambiguous. Report this as #6010.
           GELIB: The filename has ? or * in a condition and neither is
           allowed.

 6020      The filename is invalid. Report this as #6020.
           GELIB: Illegal filename.

 6030      The specified drive is invalid. Report this as #6030.
           GELIB: Drive specified in the filename is not present on your
           computer.

 6040      A System error prevented access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6040.
           GELIB: File not open.

 6050      A System error prevented access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6050.
            GELIB: File already open.

 6060      A System error prevented access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6060.
           GELIB: Too many files open.

 6070      The directory is full. Report this as #6070.
           GELIB: Directory full.

 6080      The disk was changed during the write. Report this as #6080.
           GELIB: The disk was changed during a write.

 6090      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6090.
           GELIB: Error reading file.

 6110      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6110.
           GELIB: Abnormal end of file encountered.

 6120      File permissions do not allow this operation. Report this as
           #6120.
           GELIB: File read/write permissions violated.

 6130      The file was not found. Report this as #6130.
           GELIB: Call to FDESC failed because specified file is not
           present.

 6140      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6140.
           GELIB: Rename file.

 6150      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6150.
           GELIB: Parameter in GELIB file system call was too long.

 6160      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6160.
           GELIB: Parameter in GELIB file system call was too long.

 6170      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6170.
           GELIB: Invalid EXE file in call to CHAIN.

 6180      There is no room to load the program. Report this as #6180.
           GELIB: Not enough memory to load program.

 6190      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6190.
           GELIB: Unexpected or unknown error in GELIB file system call.

 6200      The disk is full. Report this as #6200.
           GELIB: No more room on the current disk.

 6210      A System error prevented access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6210.
           GELIB: Undiagnosed disk write error.

 6220      A System error prevented access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6220.
           GELIB: Illegal page count in UREAD/UWRITE call.

 6230      No drives are attached. Report this as #6230.
           GELIB: No disk drives are present on your computer.

 6240      The drive code is invalid. Report this as #6240.
           GELIB: Invalid drive code specified in file name on GELIB call.

 6300      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6300.
           GELIB: String parameter in GELIB call is too short to receive
           returned data.

 6301      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6301.
           GELIB: Invalid option in call to XOPEN.

 6302      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6302.
           GELIB: Key not found in environment area.

 6303      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6303.
           GELIB: Specified subdirectory in file access is not valid on your
           computer.

 6305      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6305.
           GELIB: File permission violation.

 6307      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6307.
           GELIB: Memory control blocks destroyed.

 6308      Your memory is insufficient. Report this as #6308.
           GELIB: Not enough memory to run load loader for CHAIN or RUNPGM.

 6309      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6309.
           GELIB: Invalid memory block address.

 6310      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6310.
           GELIB: Invalid environment.

 6315      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6315.
           GELIB: Empty string passed to GETENV as search key.

 6316      You cannot remove the current directory. Report this as #6316.
           GELIB: Attempted to remove current directory.

 6317      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6317.
           GELIB: Different drives specified in two filenames.

 6350      A System error prevented the access to a disk file. Please consult
           your Microsoft OnLine representative and report this as #6350.
           GELIB: RUNPGM could not find end of current program.


 Message Codes 9000 - 9999

 9401      An error occurred when trying to run your program on the Service.
           (FCMSPAWN failed.) Please consult your Microsoft OnLine
           representative and report this as #9401.

 9402      An error occurred when trying to read from your program on the
           Service. (FCMREAD failed.) Please consult your Microsoft OnLine
           representative and report this as #9402.

 9403      An error occurred when trying to write to your program on the
           Service. (FCMWRITE failed.) Please consult your Microsoft OnLine
           representative and report this as #9403.

 9404      An error occurred when trying to terminate your program on the
           Service. (FCMCLOSE failed.) Please consult your Microsoft OnLine
           representative and report this as #9404.

 9405      The channel between Microsoft OnLine and your Service application
           was disconnected unexpectedly. Please consult your Microsoft
           OnLine representative and report this as #9405.

 9601      The Service was unable to start the application you requested.

 This appendix lists messages that Microsoft OnLine displays and provides a
 brief description of each message. If you can't solve the error condition,
 consult your Microsoft OnLine System Administrator for assistance.


 Appendix B.  Terms
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Alert
    The Alert Icon is reserved for important information or special
    announcements posted by the Microsoft System Administrator. When you are
    connected to the Service and you see the Alert Icon on the Main Screen,
    open the icon immediately.

 Attachment File
    The Attachment file is included with the Service Request and must be
    archived. If you want to transmit more than one file with your Service
    Request, you must also archive the files because you can send only one
    file with your Service Request in addition to the Description file. For
    example, if your Service Request's subject is a compiler question, you
    may want to archive and attach several source code files.

 Description File
    The Description file is required and describes the subject, content, and
    questions in your Service Request in detail. You can create the
    Description file with the Microsoft OnLine editor or with your favorite
    text editor. You can start your editor from DOS, from the Shell to DOS
    Icon, from the Service Request Mgr Menu, or from an icon you customize
    that appears on the Main Screen.

 Exchange
    The Exchange is a two-way bulletin board that you can use to find
    information posted by other Microsoft OnLine subscribers or to post
    information that you think might be useful to other subscribers.

 In Baskets
    The In Baskets store messages you've received from other users. You can
    open the Local In Basket when you are disconnected from the Service, and
    you can open the Service In Basket when you are connected to the Service.
    Messages are sent to your In Basket whether you are connected to the
    Service or not.

 Information Sources
    The Information Sources have two parts: The Microsoft KnowledgeBase
    and the Libraries. Both parts use text queries to search for specific
    information. Currently, there are two Libraries: the Membership Book
    Library and the Software Library.

 KnowledgeBase
    The KnowledgeBase is a text file database that you can query using words,
    phrases, and operators. The KnowledgeBase contains the latest technical
    information about Microsoft products, general Service information, and
    the latest Microsoft press releases.

 Libraries
    The Libraries are text file databases that you can query using words,
    phrases, and operators. There are currently two Libraries: the Membership
    Book Library and the Software Library.

 Local Address Book
    The Local Address Book contains your most frequently used addresses so
    you can easily copy them to the Send dialog box. In addition, you can
    copy addresses from the Service Address Book into your Local Address
    Book.

 Local Filing Cabinet
    The Local Filing Cabinet allows you to organize information in your In
    Basket into a hierarchy so you can find a specific piece of information
    easily.

 Membership Book
    The Membership Book contains public information about Microsoft OnLine
    users, including names, addresses, phone numbers, professional
    experience, and personal interests.

 ONLINE.INI
    This text file contains the information that Microsoft OnLine needs when
    you create a Service Request. Included in this file is the full path name
    and filename required to start your editor and your name and phone
    number, the type of computer you are using, and the port on your computer
    to which the printer is connected.

 Out Basket
    The Out Basket holds messages you've created until you are ready to send
    them.

 Quik-Comm
    The Electronic Mail System created by General Electric Information
    Services that is used in Microsoft OnLine.

 ROP Files
    These Reference Operating System Product files (ROP.IDX, ROP.DAT,
    ROP.FIL) contain information about Microsoft products, their version
    numbers, and operating systems. These files must reside in the same
    subdirectory as the Microsoft OnLine program files in order for you to
    create a Service Request Header.

 Service Address Book
    The Service Address Book contains the addresses for other Microsoft
    OnLine subscribers. You can search the Service Address Book for a
    subscriber's address and then copy it to your Local Address Book.

 Service Request
    Send a Service Request to Microsoft to get specific technical questions
    answered. You can attach a description file that you create with your
    editor of choice, and you can also attach an archived file to transmit
    with the request.

 Service Response
    The response that Microsoft sends you to answer the questions posed in
    your Service Request. The Service Response also contains a Service
    Request Reference Number ID you need to include on a Supplemental Service
    Request to Microsoft should you send one.

 Service Request Header
    The Service Request Header contains your name, phone number, the type of
    computer you have, the type of request, and the request's priority. In
    addition, the Header contains information about the product you are
    asking about to ensure that the request is routed automatically to the
    appropriate Microsoft Support Engineer.

 Software Library
    The Microsoft Software Library contains files posted by Microsoft for use
    with Microsoft products. This Library contains ASCII, binary, and
    archived files, which are compacted binary files.


 Appendix C.  Customizing Microsoft OnLine
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This appendix describes:

    ş   Customizing Microsoft OnLine.

 You can modify the file BT50.ZIF with any standard editor to customize
 Microsoft OnLine. You can create and customize icons, which depend on the
 definitions in BT50.ZIF for display and functionality. These icons created
 with the BT50.ZIF file are called "local icons" and can be displayed either
 when you are disconnected from or connected to the Service or both.

 One useful modification is to add an icon for your editor so you can use it
 to compose Electronic Mail Messages and Service Request Descriptions. An
 example of this modification appears at the end of this appendix and is
 titled "Sample BT50.ZIF Modification."

 BT50.ZIF is divided into two sections. The first section, which is
 optional, consists of icon picture definitions. The second section contains
 icon definition records, which determine when an icon is displayed and what
 happens when you select it. These icon definition records are comprised of
 icon definition fields.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   Before you modify the BT50.ZIF file, be sure to make a backup copy of this
   file.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Icon Picture Definition

 Microsoft OnLine has eleven predefined icon pictures stored in the main
 program. You can use any of these eleven pictures or you can design your
 own.

 Microsoft OnLine stores the pictures that are to be displayed as icons in
 the computer's memory. Any pictures defined in the BT50.ZIF file will be
 read into this internal store. The pictures defined in this file should be
 ASCII characters in a 9 x 4 array. The picture character array must be
 exactly 4 lines of exactly 9 characters each; if needed, you can pad the
 lines with spaces to fill the 9 characters.

 Each picture definition is delimited by the string "PICTURE TAG" followed
 by an equal sign and the two-letter picture tag. This tag is used in icon
 functionality definitions to specify which picture should be shown for each
 icon. These picture definitions can also be used to replace the icon
 pictures that Microsoft OnLine generates internally.

 The actual icon picture is drawn nine characters wide on the four lines
 following the picture tag line. Each icon picture definition is ended by the
 line "END PICTURE." The two-letter Picture Tag must be in upper-case
 letters.

 For example, to replace the current Out Basket picture with a new one, you
 would enter the following in the picture definition section of BT50.ZIF:

 PICTURE TAG=EM
 Ú¿     Ú¿
 ||     ||
 |À-----Ù|
 À-------Ù
 END PICTURE

 You can also use any of the 11 Microsoft OnLine internal pictures as the
 picture which is to appear for an icon. This can be done by referencing any
 of the 11 internal picture tags in the icon definition record.


 Icon Definition Records

 To display local icons, you need to enter icon definition records into the
 file BT50.ZIF. For each local icon you want to display, there must be one
 icon definition record in the BT50.ZIF file. The fields in the icon
 definition records can be entered in upper- or lower-case letters.

 The icons you customize will appear in the area now used for host-defined
 services. Because you can have more than six icons and use the direction
 keys to display them, these icons are called "scrollable icons." The number
 of scrollable icons on the microcomputer is limited to 50, so if you define
 25 local icons to appear when connected to the Service, the Service can
 download only 25 icons.

 These icon definition records have the fields in the following table. Each
 of these fields is described in detail in following sections.

 Field                        Function

 BEGIN ICON                   Begin Icon definition.

 PICTURE TAG=TT               Two-character tag that identifies picture to
                              be shown

 TITLE=TEXT                   Title shown under icon on screen (20
                              characters maximum)

 WHEN=ONLINE,OFFLINE,BOTH     When to display the icon: connected to the
                              Service or disconnected from the Service or
                              both

 PCEXIT=0-4                   An integer that specifies type of concurrent
                              exit on microcomputer

 PCHANDLE=PATH/PRGNAME        Path and program name of application to run on
                              the microcomputer

 COMMAND=TEXT                 Chained or spawned process arguments
                              (optional)

 HSEXIT=0-3                   An integer that specifies what type of
                              concurrent exit the Service performs

 HSSTRING=FILE+ARGS           Filename of program to be run on Service

 END ICON                     End Icon definition


 Icon Definition Fields

 Picture Tag

 A picture tag is a two-letter field (EM, BB, MM) that references an icon
 picture. You can define this picture or you can use one of the internal
 pictures defined in BT50.ZIF.

 Microsoft OnLine has these internally defined picture tags:

    ş   In Basket = EM

    ş   Out Basket = OB

    ş   Bulletin Board = BB

    ş   Exchange (2-Way Bulletin Board) = B2

    ş   Information Sources (Databases) = DB

    ş   Service Request Xfer (Concurrent Exit) = CE

    ş   Connect to Service = CH

    ş   Disconnect from Service = DH

    ş   Service Request Manager (Host Forms) = HF

    ş   Pass Through = PT

    ş   News = NW

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   If you use one of the internal icon pictures to create a new icon and then
   select that new icon, the icon's functionality will be as defined in the
   icon definition record. The new icon will not have the same functionality
   as the one from which you chose the picture unless you set up the new
   icon's definition record to have the same functionality.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Title

 This field contains the title that appears below the icon picture when
 displayed on the screen. The title can be up to 20 characters.

 When

 This field specifies when the icon is to be shown:

 Entry in When Field          Definition

 Offline                      Show icon only when disconnected from the
                              Service

 Online                       Show icon only when connected to the Service

 Both                         Show icon both when disconnected from the
                              Service and connected to the Service

 PCExit

 This field specifies what type of concurrent exit should be performed on
 the microcomputer when you select the icon. The choices are:

 0  Terminate Microsoft OnLine on the microcomputer and chain to the
 specified application, but do not return to OnLine at the conclusion of the
 other program. This might be useful for running another program after you
 are finished with Microsoft OnLine.

 1  Terminate Microsoft OnLine on the microcomputer and chain to the
 specified application; then restart Microsoft OnLine at the conclusion of
 the other program. Use 1 to run a program that requires more memory than
 what remains after Microsoft OnLine is loaded - for example, a program that
 doesn't have enough memory to run spawned from Microsoft OnLine using
 PCExit=4 (see below).

 4  Run Microsoft OnLine memory resident and run another program in the
 excess memory available above Microsoft OnLine. If the microcomputer is
 connected to the Service when you select the icon, the Error-Free Protocol
 will close down before the spawned process is started up, but the
 Communications line will be left open. The Error-Free Protocol will then be
 restarted when control returns from the spawned process. If you chose this
 PCExit and set HSExit=0, you will be disconnected by the host after ten
 minutes.

 PCHandle

 The application handle is the full path and filename of the program you
 want to run. You can enter only the program name in this field if the
 program to be run is in the current subdirectory or in the DOS path.
 Microsoft OnLine will not change the current subdirectory to the one
 specified in this field. The program executed by OnLine can change
 subdirectories, but it must change back to the directory it started from
 (the Microsoft OnLine directory) before it terminates.

 Command

 If the microcomputer application you want to run when you select an icon
 requires a command line, you use this field to state the command line
 information.

 There are several ways of specifying command line processing in the
 BT50.ZIF file. First, you can enter a literal command line; this is a line
 of text with no embedded quotation marks (either single or double) and with
 no embedded percent sign (%). The literal command line is appended to the
 program name when placed in the batch file or passed to the program on
 startup, exactly as if it had been typed at the DOS level.

 If you enter the percent sign (%) in the Command field, it indicates that a
 form is to be opened on the microcomputer screen and that you will be
 prompted to enter the data for the Command field.

 If you enter only the percent sign (%) in the Command field, the prompt
 "Please enter the missing data" will be displayed. If you place a string
 enclosed in either single or double quotation marks in the Command field,
 then that string will be displayed without the quotation marks.

 If you press ESC when you are prompted to enter the missing data, you can
 cancel the operation and close the form. If you press ENTER, you accept
 the data entered in the Command field prompt and chain to the specified
 program.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 TIP
   The % can be present, with or without a specified prompt string or with or
   without other literal data. It can be directly written as an argument to
   the program to which it is chained. The presence of a quoted string
   without a matching occurrence of the substitution % is not permitted.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 In summary, some of the possible formats for the command line in the
 BT50.ZIF file are:

    ş   nothing.

    ş   literal string not in quotation marks.

    ş   %

    ş   % ["display prompt"].

    ş   [literal string] [%] [`display prompt'] [literal string].

 HSExit

 This field specifies what type of concurrent exit the Service should
 perform when you select the icon. The choices are:

 0  Do nothing. The server remains resident and idle and timeouts are
 still active.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   If you use this exit while connected to the Service, the Service will drop
   the connection after ten minutes. Because the microcomputer program still
   thinks it's connected after the Service drops the line, you may have to
   reboot your microcomputer to recover.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 1  Terminate the connection to the Service as if you selected the
 Disconnect from Service Icon.

 3  When connected to the Service, have Microsoft OnLine call the System
 to execute the specified program. The Service will close down the Error-Free
 Protocol but will leave the Communications line open. The program started
 from Microsoft OnLine can then communicate with the microcomputer over a TTY
 link. When Microsoft OnLine resumes, it will restart the Error-Free
 Protocol.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   Do not use 3 for HSEXIT for any icon except Service Request Xfer.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 HSString

 This field specifies which program is to be run on the Service if Exit Type
 3 is entered in the HSExit field. This program name can be followed by an
 optional start-up argument.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 IMPORTANT
   This information is provided for illustrative purposes only. DO NOT
   alter the Service Request Xfer Icon functional definition. You will not
   need to use HSSTRING in your own icon definitions.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Sample BT50.ZIF Modification

 This section contains a sample BT50.ZIF that defines four icon pictures and
 contains the icon definition records, which define the icon's functionality
 for those pictures. Note that there are two different icon definitions for
 starting the Service Request Mgr. The first starts Service Request Mgr as a
 chained process. The second starts it as a spawned process. In general,
 spawning is faster than chaining, but it requires more free memory.

 In addition, this sample file listing contains an icon picture and
 definition record to start Microsoft Word from an icon on the Main Screen.

 Icon Picture Definition

 PICTURE TAG=PT
 ÖÍ-Í-Í-Í-
 È-Í-Í-Í-»
 ÚÍ-Í-Í-Í¾
 È-Í-CHAIN
 END PICTURE

 PICTURE TAG=HF
 ² ² ² ² ²
  ± ± ± ±
   ° ° °
   SPAWN
 END PICTURE

 PICTURE TAG=MW
  ÉÍÍÍÍÍ¸
  ºWord ³
  º Word³
  Ó-----Ù
 END PICTURE

 PICTURE TAG=CO
 Shell to
 DOS:
      C:\>
 Start
 END PICTURE

 Icon Definition Records

 begin icon
 picture tag=pt
 title= Service Request MGR
 when=both
 pcexit=1
 pchandle=sr_mgr.exe
 hsexit=1
 end icon

 begin icon
 picture tag=ce
 title=Service Request Xfer
 when=online
 pcexit=4
 pchandle=sr_xfer.exe
 hsexit=3
 hsstring=online
 end icon

 begin icon
 picture tag=hf
 title= Service Request MGR
 when=both
 pcexit=4
 pchandle=sr_mgr.exe
 hsexit=0
 end icon

 begin icon
 picture tag=mw
 title= Microsoft Word 4.0
 when=both
 pcexit=4
 pchandle=c:\word\word.com
 command=%"Enter the name of the document to edit:"
 hsexit=0
 end icon

 begin icon
 picture tag=co
 title= COMMAND.COM
 when=both
 pcexit=4
 pchandle=c:\command.com
 hsexit=0
 end icon


 Appendix D.  Creating Dialog Files
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This appendix describes how to create dialog files, which establish
 communication and control data exchange with the Service.

 The ELU (Enhanced Logon Utility) dialog files allow you to create or modify
 the sequence of steps to establish communications between your microcomputer
 running Microsoft OnLine and the Service. In addition, these files also
 direct the exchange of data between the microcomputer and the Service. These
 ELU files are LOGON.DIA, LOGON.DIX, LOGOFF.DIA, and LOGOFF.DIX.

 When you begin connecting to the Service, Microsoft OnLine searches for the
 file LOGON.DIX, which is a compiled version of the file LOGON.DIA. If the
 program finds the .DIX file, it processes the dialog commands to connect to
 the network. If the program doesn't find the .DIX file, it calls a
 subroutine that compiles the .DIA file into a .DIX file. Similarly, when you
 disconnect from the Service, the program looks for the LOGOFF.DIX file; if
 it can't find the .DIX file, it compiles the .DIA file.

 Because the program looks for the .DIX file first, be sure to delete the
 .DIX files when you create a new .DIA file. Then, when you connect or
 disconnect from the Service, Microsoft OnLine will compile the new .DIA
 file.

 There are several sets of LOGON and LOGOFF files on the Microsoft OnLine
 Utilities disk 1 in 5.25-inch format or the Program 2 disk in 3.5-inch
 format. Because ELU timing is all code loop based, you enter your
 microcomputer's processor speed when you install Microsoft OnLine and it
 copies the appropriate dialog files to your disk.

 You can modify or create the .DIA file with any standard text editor that
 produces ASCII (unformatted) files. Be sure to make copies of the files
 before editing them and be sure to delete the existing .DIX files before you
 try to connect to the Service or disconnect from the Service. If you use the
 Microsoft OnLine Editor to create or change the .DIA file, quit the program
 and erase the .DIX file. You must quit Microsoft OnLine to erase the .DIX
 file if you use the Microsoft OnLine editor; you can't erase this file using
 the Shell to DOS Icon or the menus because the program will not operate
 correctly.

 Dialog processing ends when the last record in the file is processed or
 when the status code becomes non-zero. The status code remains zero until
 the program encounters an error, or you press CTRL+C (BREAK) or ESC,
 or the STATUS command changes the value.

 Lines in the dialog files reference the term "mval," which means Missing
 Values. The missing values are supplied by Microsoft OnLine from the data
 you entered on the Communications Parameters dialog box. These items include
 System Access Number, Password, and your Electronic Mail Password.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE
   For more information, see the README.DOC file on the Microsoft OnLine
   Utilities disk 1 in 5.25-inch format or the Program 2 disk in 3.5-inch
   format.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Special Characters

 Some commands require Hex values for special characters. These characters
 are listed in the following table.

      Character                              Value

      Carriage Return                        0D

      Line Feed                              0A

      Horizontal Tab                         09

      Backslash   \                          5C

      Single Quotation Mark    '             27

      Double Quotation Mark    "             22

      Left Bracket    [                      5B

      Right Bracket    ]                     5D

      Tilde                                 7E

      Rub Out                                7F


 Rules for Creating Dialog Files

    ş   The dialog file can't be longer than 128 lines, including comment and
        blank lines.

    ş   The system recognizes the keywords by their first three characters.

    ş   You can type the commands in upper- or lower-case letters.

    ş   When a parameter must be set off in quotation marks, you can use
        either single or double quotation marks.

    ş   Do not change any of the CALLUSER lines. These lines correspond to
        the numbered boxes on the Connect to Service screen. The statements
        that must be completed before the next step or box should be in the
        file before the CALLUSER statement for that step.

    ş   Do not use the MESSAGE command. Do not add any messages and do not
        delete existing messages. The MESSAGE command is not documented in
        this appendix.

    ş   Do not use the STATUS command to change the status code. If you
        change the status code, the System will generate a message stating
        that an unknown error has occurred. The STATUS command is not
        documented in this appendix.


 Dialog File Commands

 BREAK

 Transmit a break. This command sends a break signal to the host computer.
 The default is 250 milliseconds of break (null character plus framing
 error).

 CASE

 Delay for specific matching text. The syntax of this command is:

    CASE <case cond> [;<case cond>...;<case cond>] [ELSE <label>]

 Each <case cond> is made up of text that indicates the incoming data
 required to proceed with the dialog and an optional target label. You can
 include a maximum of four CASE conditions.

 The text can be ASCII Characters, hex string, or missing values (mval);
 spaces count as characters in the mask. To match a control character,
 include the hex value.

 A <case cond> is satisfied when data matching the text is received and
 control passes to the target label. If the label is not present, then
 control passes to the next line in the dialog. The program reads incoming
 data until it finds a match for the <case cond> or a timeout occurs. On a
 timeout, control passes to the ELSE <label> if one is present; otherwise,
 the program stops trying to connect or disconnect.

     A <case cond> has the form: 'string' [:<label>]

 DROP n

 Issue a Line Drop n is an integer value in milliseconds that indicates when
 to issue a line drop to end the connection to the Service.

 DUMP

 Discard all queued RS-232 data. Incoming data can become queued during
 processing because ELU uses interrupt-driven I/O. Use this command to empty
 the buffers of queued data.

 EOL \hexval\ | NONE

 Change the End of Line character to the hex value \hexval\, which specifies
 the hex digits for this character. The End of Line character terminates each
 line of text transmitted to the host by the SEND statement. Use NONE instead
 of \hexval\ to specify no End of Line character. For example, to specify the
 End of Line character as a Line Feed, you would type the command EOL \0A\;
 the default End of Line character is the Carriage Return (0D).

 GOTO <label>

 Control flow within the dialog, where <label> represents the name specified
 with the LABEL statement. GOTO performs an unconditional and immediate
 branch to the specified <label>. For example, to branch to the label DONE,
 you would enter the statement GOTO DONE.

 LABEL <label>

 Control the flow within the dialog. The LABEL statement specifies the
 target of a GOTO, CASE, or ELSE command. Only the first 14 characters of the
 label are significant and the <label> contains only alphanumeric characters.
 A dialog file can contain up to 32 labels.

 MASK <pin> <switch>

 Mask status pin. <pin> indicates which RS-232C pin to mask:

      Pin                       Signal Masked

      CD                        Carrier Detect
      DSR                       Data Set Ready
      CTS                       Clear to Send

 <switch> indicates if the specified RS-232C pin should be checked prior to
 reading or writing data to the communications port:

      Switch                    Function

      ON                        Check the specified pin
      OFF                       Turn off masking for the specified pin

 SEND 'data'

 Send data to the Service. 'data' is the string to be sent to the
 communications port. The data can be delimited by single or double quotation
 marks and can contain ASCII characters, hex strings, or missing value
 arguments. You represent hex values by a pair of hex digits enclosed in
 backslashes; you can also include multiple hex values by enclosing the
 values in a single pair of backslashes, for example, \4259450D\.

 You can also specify a half-second delay before a characters is transmitted
 by inserting a tilde (), for example, 'HHH'.

 Microsoft OnLine automatically appends an End of Line character to the end
 of the outgoing data. The default End of Line character is the Carriage
 Return (0D), but you can change this character with the EOL command.

 SEND 'data[N]data'

 Send data to the Service. N is an integer from 1 to [number of values in
 mval]. Transmitted data records can optionally include a dialog argument for
 a missing value (mval), which is an integer label enclosed in the square
 brackets. The label indicates which value from mval should be inserted into
 an outgoing data stream.

 For example, if the dialog file contains SEND 'ATTD[1]' and the mval is
 9,8365060;AXY99123, then the complete outgoing data stream is SEND
 'ATTD9,8365060.

 TIMEOUT <number>

 Set the timeout for incoming data, where <number> is an integer value that
 represents the length of the timeout in seconds. If no data has been
 received by the timeout period specified in <number>, then Microsoft OnLine
 assumes that the communication has failed. The default value is 30 seconds.

 WAITFOR <time>

 Delay the dialog processing, where <time> is an integer value that
 represents the delay in milliseconds.

 WAITFOR <pin>

 Delay processing the dialog for signal detection. The syntax is

      WAITFOR <pin> [<pin>...<pin>] [ELSE <label>]

 This command allows you to delay dialog processing until a signal is
 detected on the specified RS-232C status pin(s) or until the timeout
 specified by the TIMEOUT command has expired. If the timeout is exceeded,
 the program branches to the ELSE <label> if such a label exists. If the
 label doesn't exist, the dialog will end. The default timeout is 30 seconds
 unless you alter it with the TIMEOUT command.

 See the MASK command for descriptions of the <pin> values.

 WAITFOR 'text' [ELSE <label>]

 Delay processing until a specific text string is received. The 'text'
 string can contain ASCII characters, hex strings, or missing values. Spaces
 are significant in the mask. To enter a control character in the mask, type
 the appropriate hex code.

 Microsoft OnLine will read the incoming data until data matching 'text' is
 received or until a timeout occurs. If the timeout is exceeded, the program
 branches to the ELSE <label> if such a label exists. If the label doesn't
 exist, the dialog will end. The default timeout is 30 seconds unless you
 alter it with the TIMEOUT command.


 Contents of a Sample LOGON.DIA File

 comment ****************************************************
 comment * The following dialog logs on to Microsoft OnLine
 comment * via a Hayes-compatible modem.
 comment * Required mval parameter is
 comment * 'phone;usernumber;password;acommaddress;qcomm
 comment * password,version'
 comment ****************************************************

 comment * send step 2 message - checking modem

 calluser 2 0
 mask cd off
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 send 'ATHE1V1'
 waitfor '0K\0D\' else COMERR
 comment * send step 3 message - dialing the phone
 calluser 3 0
 send 'ATTD[1]'
 waitfor 'CONNECT' else COMERR
 goto LOGON
 label COMERR
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 100
 label LOGON
 comment * send step 4 message - telling the host that I'm here
 calluser 4 0
 waitfor 150
 send '\7F7F7F\H\7F7F7F\H\7F7F7F\H'
 waitfor 'U#=' else ERR1
 goto CONT1
 label ERR1
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 101
 label CONT1
 comment * send step 5 message - sending account and password
 calluser 5 0
 send '[2], [3]'
 case 'p=':BTLOG;'UNAVAILABLE':ERR2;'FAULT':ERR3;'REENTER'CONT1
 else ERR1
 comment * that system is unavailable
 label ERR 2
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 102
 comment * Validation fault, reenter U#
 label ERR3
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 103
 label BTLOG
 comment * send step 6 message - connecting to Microsoft OnLine
 calluser 6 0
 send '[4],[5];[6];2'
 case 'QUIKCOMM':ERR4;'BAD':ERR5;'IN':CONT2;'  ':CONT3 else ERR11
 comment * Quik-Comm unavailable
 label ERR4
 waitfor 'UNAVAILABE' else ERR11
 send '+++ATZ'
 wait for '0K\0D\'
 status 104

 comment * Bad version
 label ERR5
 waitfor 'VERSION' else ERR11
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 105

 comment * Invalid Quik-Comm ID or In use or International System
 Unavailable
 label CONT2
 case 'USE':ERR6;'VALID QUIKCOMM ID':ERR7;'INTERNATIONAL':ERR8
 else ERR11
 comment * In use
 label ERR6
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 106

 comment * Invalid Quik-Comm ID
 label ERR7
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 107

 comment * International System Unavailable
 label ERR8
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 108
 label CONT3
 case 'OF TIME':ERR9;'READY':DONE;'ERROR PREPARING SYSTEM':ERR10
 else ERR11

 comment * Out of time
 label ERR9
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 109

 comment * Fatal error preparing System
 label ERR10
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 110

 comment * Unrecognized response from host
 label ERR11
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'
 status 111

 comment * Logon successful
 label DONE
 send '+++ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D\'

 Contents of a Sample LOGOFF.DIA File

 comment**********************************************************
 comment * The following dialog file logs off Microsoft OnLine via a
 comment * Hayes-compatible modem.
 comment**********************************************************

 dump
 timeout 3
 eol NONE
 send '+++'
 eol \0D\
 waitfor 3000
 send 'ATZ'
 waitfor '0K\0D'
 timeout 30


 Index
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 A
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 ADD-LIST
      Defined
 ADD-TO-LOCAL
      Defined
 Address Books
      Defined
      Local
           Adding Comments
           Creating
           Importing File
           Printing
           Removing
           Saving
 ADDRESS-BOOKS
      Defined
 Address
      Correcting
 Addressing
      Copying Service Address
      Electronic Mail Message
      Searching for an Address
 Alert
      Defined
      Menu Commands
      Printing
      Reading
      Removing
      Saving to Disk File
 Alias
      Bulletin Board Editor
      SR-Status
 ALL
      Defined
 AND Logical Operator
 Application
      Starting from Microsoft OnLine
 ARC File Type
      Defined
 Archive Utiltity
 Archived File
      Defined
 ASK
      Defined
 Attached File
      Creating

 B
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 BACK-IN-OUTBASKET
      Defined
 Baud Rate
      Default
      Selecting
 BEGIN-SEARCH
      Defined
 BIN File Type
      Defined
 Block
      Copying
      Deleting
      Marking in Messages and Address Books
      Moving
      Removing Marker
 BT50.ZIF File
      Command Field Defined
      Function
      HSExit Field Defined
      HSString Field Defined
      Icon Definition Fields
      Icon Definition Record Fields
      Icon Definition Records
      Location
      PCExit Field Defined
      PCHandle Field Defined
      Picture Tag Field Defined
      Sample File
      Starting Editor from Main Screen
      Structure
      Title Field Defined
      When Field Defined
 BTCONFIG File
      Location
 BTTRACE.LOG
 Bug List
      Retrieveing
 Bulletin Board Editor
      How to Contact

 C
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 CANCEL
      Defined
 CHANGE-PASSWORD
      Defined
 Changing
      Communications Parameters
      Communications Profile
      Display Options
      Installation Parameters
      Key to Display Menus
      Password
      Service Request
      Service Request Description File
      Status of Service Request
 Choosing
      Items on Menus
 CLEAR-ADDRESSES
      Defined
 CLIENT-SERVICES
      Defined
 Closing
      Electronic Mail Message
 COM1 Port
 Command Field
      Defined
 Command Line Processing
      Icon Creation
 COMMAND.COM File
      Location for Microsoft OnLine
 Commands
      Reference
 Communications Line Status
      Displaying
 Communications Parameters
      Changing
      Setting
 Communications Port
      Default
 Communications Profile
      Changing
      Setting
 COMMUNICATIONS
      Defined
 CONFIG.SYS File
      FILES Statement
 Configuration File
 Configuration Parameters
      When You Can Change
 Configuration Requirements
 Configuring
      Modem Serial Port
 Connect to Service Icon
 Connecting to Service
 COPY
      Defined
 Copying
      Address on Service
      Block
      Items to a List
           Local Filing Cabinet
 Correcting
      Address
           Electronic Mail Message
 CREATE
 CREATE
      Defined
 Creating
      BT50.ZIF Sample File
      Comments in Local Address Book
      Electronic Mail Message
      Icons
      Local Address Book
      New List in Local Filing Cabinet
      Service Request Header
 Customer Service List
      Exchange
 Customizing
      Icons Displayed
      Sample BT50.ZIF File
 Cutting and Pasting
      Electronic Mail Message

 D
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Data Files
      Location
 Debug
 Default Printer Port
 Default
      Baud Rate
      Communications Port
 Defining
      Icon Pictures
 DELETE
      Defined
 Deleting
      Block
      Characters in Dialog Box
      Characters in Messages and Address Books
      Items in a List in Local Filing Cabinet
      List in Local Filing Cabinet
      Service Request
      To End of Line
 Description File
      Attaching to Service Request
      Creating
      Defined
 DIA Files
      Commands
      Defined
      Rules for Creating
 Dialog Box
      Deleting Characters In
      How to Choose Items
      Moving Highlight
      Removing
      Using the Keyboard with
 Dialog Files
      Commands
      Rules for Creating
 Disconnect from Service Icon
 DISCONNECT
      Defined
 Disconnecting from the Service
 Display Options
      Changing
      Setting
 DISPLAY-ONLY
      Defined
 DISPLAY-TITLES
      Defined
 Displaying
      Communications Line Status
      Contents of Out Basket
      Help Screens
      List of Titles in the Information Sources
      List of Topics
      Information Sources
      Menus
      Search Hints
      Service Address Book
      System Status
      System Usage Information
 DIX Files
      Commands
      Defined
      Rules for Creating
 Documentation Error List
      Retrieveing
 DOS Mode Command
      Using for Modem
 DOS Path
 DOS Version
 Downloading
      File in Exchange to Disk
      File Item
      Item from Exchange to Local In Basket
      Item to Local In Basket
      Text Item
      Text Item for Printing
      Text Item from Exchange to Disk
      Text Item from Exchange to Print
 DROP-IN-OUTBASKET
      Defined

 E
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 EDIT
 EDIT
      Defined
 Editing
      Electronic Mail Message
      Service Request
 Editor Alias
      When to Use
 Editor Menu Commands
 EDITOR
      Defined
 Editor
      Line End Character for Service Requests
      Starting from Microsoft OnLine
 Electronic Mail Message
      Address Books
      Addressing
      Closing
      Copying Service Address
      Correcting an Address
      Creating
      Cutting and Pasting
      Editing
      Erasing
      Finding Out Who's Read
      Forwarding
      Importing File
      In Basket
      Out Basket
      Printing
      Reading Multiple
      Reading One
      Removing
      Responding to
      Resume Editing
      Saving
      Saving File to Disk
      Saving to Disk
      Searching for Address
      Sending
      Sending All
      Sending File As
      Sending Selected
      Storing in Local Filing Cabinet
      Storing in Local In Basket
      Using the Keyboard
 Eletronic Mail Message
      Creating
 Email
      see Electronic Mail
      see Electronic Mail Message
 END PICTURE
      Defined
 ERASE
      Defined
 Erasing
      Electronic Mail Message
 Error List for Documentation
      Retrieveing
 EXACT
      Defined
 Exchange Icon
 Exchange List Menu Commands
 Exchange
      Contents
      Defined
      Differences from Information Sources
      Downlading a File to Disk
      Downloading a Text Item to Disk
      Downloading a Text Item to Print
      Downloading Items to Local In Basket
      Editor Menu Commands
      Finding an Item
      List of Topics
      Organization
      Posting Files
      Posting Text Item
      Removing Items

 F
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 F1 Key
      Function
 F2 Key
      Function
 FIFO
 File
      Attaching a Service Request Description
      Attaching to Service Request
      Creating a Service Request Description
      Downloading
           from Exchange to Disk
           from Information Sources
      Editing a Service Request Description
      Importing into Electronic Mail Message
      Importing into Local Address Book
      Location of Program and Data
      Removing from Exchange
      Sending as Electronic Mail Message
      Storing in Local Filing Cabinet
      Uploading
           as Electronic Mail Message
           to Exchange
 FILES Statement in CONFIG.SYS File
 FIND-ANY
      Defined
 Finding
      Item in Exchange
 FORWARD-NOW
      Defined
 FORWARD
      Defined
 Forwarding
      Electronic Mail Message
 Functions
      Connected to Service
      Disconnected from Service

 G
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 General Comments and Opinions List
      Exchange
 GET ALL
      Defined
 GET BOTH
      Defined
 GET DOCUMENTS
      Defined
 GET SELECTED
      Defined
 GET-ITEMS
      Defined

 H
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Hardware Requirements
 Held Status for Service Requests
 Help Screen
      Displaying
      Removing
 HELP
      Defined
 Highlight
      Moving in Dialog Box
      Moving in Messages and Address Books
 HSExit Field
      Defined
 HSString Field
      Defined

 I
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Icon
      Alert
      Disconnect to Service
      Exchange
      In Basket
      KnowledgeBase
      Membership Book
      Out Basket
      Selecting with Keyboard
      Service Request Mgr
      Service Request Xfer
      Shell to DOS
      Software Library
 Icons
      BT50.ZIF File Create
      Command Field Defined
      Creating/Customizing
      Definition Fields
      Definition Record Fields
      Definition Records
      Example of New
      HSExit Field Defined
      HSString Field Defined
      Internal Picture Tags
      Maximum Number of
      PCExit Field Defined
      PCHandle Field Defined
      Picture Definitions
      Picture Tag  Field Defined
      Sample BT50.ZIF File
      Scrollable Defined
      Title Field Defined
      When Field Defined
 IMPORT
      Defined
 Importing File into Electronic Mail Message
 Importing File into Local Address Book
 In Basket Icon
 In Basket
      Defined
      Downloading Item to
      Editor Menu Commands
      Local
      Menu Commands
      Read Quik-Comm List
      Storing Items in Local
      Unread Quik-Comm List
 Information Sources
      Content
      Defined
      Displaying a List of Titles
      Displaying a List of Topics
      Displaying Search Hints
      Downloading a File Item
      Downloading a Text Item
      Downloading a Text Item for Printing
      Downloading Item to Local In Basket
      Editor Menu Commands
      How Microsoft OnLine Searches
      How Text-Query Works
      List Menu Commands
      Logical Operators
      Opening an Item
      Search Rules and Syntax
      Searching for a Topic
      Topic List Menu Commands
 Inserting
      Characters in Messages and Address Books
 Installation Parameters
      Changing
 Installation Problems
      Who to Contact
 Installing
      Modem
      ONLINE.INI File
      Software
 Item
      Downloading from Exchange to Disk
      Downloading from Exchange to Local In Basket
      Downloading from Exchange to Print
      Finding in Exchange
      Removing from Exchange
      Uploading to Exchange

 K
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Keyboard
      Using to Fill in Service Request Entry Form
      Using to Select Icons
      Using with Dialog Boxes
      Using with Messages and Address Books
 KEYS
      Defined
 Keyword
      Buglist
      Docerr
 KnowledgeBase Icon
 KnowledgeBase
      Content
      Defined
      Displaying a List of Titles
      Displaying a List of Topics
      Displaying Search Hints
      Downloading a File Item
      Downloading a Text Item
      Downloading a Text Item for Printing
      Downloading Item to Local In Basket
      Editor Menu Commands
      How Microsoft OnLine Searches
      List Menu Commands
      Logical Operators
      Opening an Item
      Search Rules and Syntax
      Searching for a Topic
      Topic List Menu Commands

 L
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Libraries
      Defined
 Library
      Editor Menu Commands
      List Menu Commands
      Topic List Menu Commands
 LIFO
 Lists
      Exchange Topics
      In and Out Basket Defined
      Local Filing Cabinet Capacity
      Local Filing Cabinet
           Copying Items to
           Creating
           Deleting
           Deleting Items In
           Moving Items to
 Local Address Book
 Local Address Book
      Adding Comments
      Creating
      Defined
      Importing File
      Printing
      Removing
      Saving
 Local Filing Cabinet
      Contents
      Copying Items to a List
      Creating a New List
      Defined
      Deleting a List
      Deleting Items in a List
      Menu Commands
      Moving Items to a List
      Storage Capacity
      Storing Items in
 Local In Basket
      Downloading Item from Exchange
      Downloading Item to
      Editor Menu Commands
      Storing Items in
 Local Out Basket
      Editor Menu Commands
      Menu Commands
 Log File
 Logical Operator
      AND
      Information Sources
      NOT
      OR
 Logical Operators
      Multiple
 LOGOFF.DIA & .DIX Files
      Defined
 LOGOFF.DIA File Location
 LOGOFF.DIX File
      Location
 LOGON.DIA & .DIX Files
      Commands
      Defined
      Rules for Creating
 LOGON.DIA File
      Location
 LOGON.DIX & .DIA Files
      How to Create
 LOGON.DIX File
      Location
 LPT1
      Default Printer Port

 M
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Main Screen Menu Commands
 Marking
      Block
 MATCH-ADDRESSES
      Defined
 Membership Book
      Defined
      Displaying a List of Titles
      Displaying a List of Topics
      Displaying Search Hints
      Downloading a File Item
      Downloading a Text Item
      Downloading a Text Item for Printing
      Downloading Item to Local In Basket
      How Microsoft OnLine Searches
      Logical Operators
      Opening an Item
      Posting Your Information In
      Search Rules and Syntax
      Searching for a Topic
 Membership Form
      Where to Mail
 Memory Requirements
 Menus
      Alert Commands
      Changing Key to Display
      Command Reference
      Commands
      Displaying
      Editor Commands
      Exchange Editor Commands
      Exchange List Commands
      In Basket Commands
      In Basket Editor Commands
      Information Sources Editor Commands
      Information Sources List Menu Commands
      Information Sources Topic List Menu Commands
      KnowledgeBase Editor Menu Commands
      KnowledgeBase List Menu Commands
      KnowledgeBase Topic List Menu Commands
      Library Editor Commands
      Library List Menu Commands
      Library Topic List Menu Commands
      Local Filing Cabinet Commands
      Local In Basket Editor Commands
      Local Out Basket Commands
      Local Out Basket Editor Commands
      Main Screen Commands
      Non-Service
      Out Basket Editor Commands
      Out Basket List Commands
      Reference
      Removing
      Service Request Mgr Commands
      Service Response Commands
 Message
      ROP File Missing
 Microsoft University and Training List
      Exchange
 Microsoft Word
      Starting from Microsoft OnLine
 Minutes Remaining
      Defined
 Modem
      Configuring Serial Port
      Installing
 MODIFY-MESSAGE
      Defined
 MOVE
      Defined
 Moving
      Block
      Highlight in Dialog Box
      Highlight in Messages and Address Books
      Items to a List
      Local Filing Cabinet
 Multiple Logical Operators
 mval
      Defined

 N
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 New Information List
      Exchange
 New Line
      Starting
 NEW
      Defined
 Non-Service Menus
      Commands
           Reference
      Reference
 NOT Logical Operator

 O
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 ONLINE.INI File
      ASCII Format
      Defined
      Editing
      Field Lengths
      Location
 OPEN
      Defined
 Opening
      Item in the Information Sources
 Operator
      Excluding Press Releases
      Parentheses
      Range Indicator
 Operators
      see also Logical Operators
      Suffix-Masking Character
 OR Logical Operator
 Out Basket Icon
 Out Basket
      Defined
      Displaying Contents
      Editor Menu Commands
      List Menu Commands
      Sending All Messages
      Sending Selected Messages
      Sent Quik-Comm List
 OUTPUT
      Defined
 Overview of Microsoft OnLine System
 OVERWRITE
      Defined

 P
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Parentheses
      Combining Search Words
 Password
      Changing
 PASTE
      Defined
 Path, DOS, Location of COMMAND.COM
 PCExit Field
      Defined
 PCHandle Field
      Defined
 Picture Tag Field
      Defined
 PICTURE TAG
      Defined
 Port
      Default Printer
 Posting
      Files in Exchange
      Text Item in Exchange
 Press Releases
      Excluding from Search
 PRINT NO
      Defined
 PRINT YES
      Defined
 PRINT
      Defined
 Printer
      Default Printer Port
 PRINTER
      Defined
 Printer
      Using with Microsoft OnLine
 Printing
      Alert
      Electronic Mail Message
      Local Address Book
      Service Request
      System Usage Information
      Text Item Downloaded from Information Sources
      Text Item from Exchange
 Priorities
      Service Requests, Described
 Product Support Services List
      Exchange
 Product Support Services Telemarketing Number
 PROFILES
      Defined
 Program Files
      Location

 Q
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Quik-Comm Electronic Mail Address
 Quik-Comm Password
 QUIK-COMM-OPTIONS
      Defined
 Quik-Comm
      Defined
      see Electronic Mail Message
 QUIT
      Defined
 Quitting Microsoft OnLine

 R
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Range Indicator Operator
 RE-ADDRESS
      Defined
 Read Quik-Comm List
      Defined
 Reading
      Alert
      Multiple Electronic Mail Messages
      One Electronic Mail Message
 README.DOC File
 RECEIVE-FILE
      Defined
 Receiving
      Service Response
 RELEASE
      Defined
 REMOVE
      Defined
 Removing
      Alert
      Block Marker
      Dialog Box
      Electronic Mail Message
      File You Posted
      Help Screens
      Items in Exchange
      Local Address Book
      Menus
 RENAME
      Defined
 REQUESTS
      Defined
 Requirements
      DOS Version
      Hardware
      Memory
      Software
      System
 RESPECIFY-SEARCH
      Defined
 RESPOND
      Defined
 Responding to
      Electronic Mail Message
 Response
      Receiving for Service Request
 RESPONSES
      Defined
 Responses
      Service Requests
 RESUME
      Defined
 ROP File Missing
      Message
 ROP Files
      Defined
      Function

 S
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 SAVE-ADDRESSES
      Defined
 SAVE-LOCALLY
      Defined
 SAVE-ON-DISK
      Defined
 SAVE-TO-DISK
      Defined
 Saving
      Alert to Disk File
      Electronic Mail File To Disk
      Electronic Mail Message
      Local Address Book
      System Usage Information
 Search Hints for Information Sources
      Displaying
 Search Rules and Syntax for Information Sources
 SEARCH-HINTS
      Defined
 Searching the Information Sources
 Searching
      Address on Service
 SELECTED
      Defined
 Selecting
      Baud Rate
      Electronic Mail Messages to Send
      Icon
 Sending
      All Electronic Mail Messages
      Electronic Mail Message
      Selected Electronic Mail Messages
      Service Requests
 Sent Quik-Comm List
      Defined
 Serial Port for Modem
      Configuring
 Service Address Book
      Copying to Local
      Defined
      Displaying
      Searching
 Service In Basket
      Defined
 Service Menus
      Reference
 Service Out Basket
      Defined
 Service Request Header
      Defined
 Service Request Mgr Icon
 Service Request Mgr Menu Commands
 Service Request Xfer Icon
 Service Request
      Defined
 Service Requests
      Attaching a Description File
      Attaching an Archieved File
      Changing Status
      Contents
      Creating
      Creating a Description File
      Creating a Header
      Deleting
      Editing Description File
      Entry Form, Using Keyboard with
      Held Status
      Inquiring About Status
      ONLINE.INI File Required
      Header, Defined
      ID Number
      Line End Character for Description File
      ONLINE.INI File
      Overview
      Printing
      Priorities
      Receiving a Response
      Response
      ROP Files
      Sending
      Supplemental
      Updating
      Viewing
      Viewing Response
      Unsent Status
 Service Response
      Defined
      Menu Commands
 Service
      Connecting to
      Disconnecting from
 SET-UP
      Defined
 Setting
      Communications Parameters
      Communications Profile
      Display Options
 Shell to DOS Icon
      Defined
 SKIP
 Software Library
      Content
      Defined
      Displaying a List of Titles
      Displaying a List of Topics
      Displaying Search Hints
      Downloading a File Item
      Downloading a Text Item
      Downloading a Text Item for Printing
      Downloading Item to Local In Basket
      How Microsoft OnLine Searches
      Icon
      Logical Operators
      Opening an Item
      Search Rules and Syntax
      Searching for a Topic
 Software
      Installing
      Requirements
 Sound
 SR-Status Alias
      When to Use
 Starting Microsoft OnLine
 Status
      Changing Service Request
      Defined
      Displaying Communications Line
      Displaying System
      Held for Service Requests
      Unsent for Service Requests
 STAY-CONNECTED
      Defined
 Storing
      Items in Local Filing Cabinet
      Items in Local In Basket
 Subdirectory
      Data Files
      Program Files
      Starting Microsoft OnLine
 Suffix-Masking Operator
 Suggestions List
      Exchange
 Supplemental Service Request
      Creating
 System Access Number
 System Administrator
 System Password
 System Requirements
 System Status
      Displaying
 System Usage Information
      Displaying
      Printing
      Saving to Disk

 T
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Telephone Number to Connect with Service
 Telephone Number
      Outside Line
 Text Item
      Downloading from Exchange to Disk
      Downloading from Exchange to Local In Basket
      Downloading from Exchange to Print
      Uploading to Exchange
 Text-Query Method
 THE-AUTHORS
      Defined
 Title Field
      Defined
 TO-SKIP-REMAINING
      Defined
 TOPICS
      Defined
 Topics
      Exchange
 TRY-AGAIN
 TXT File Type
      Defined

 U
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Unread Quik-Comm List
      Defined
 Unsent Status for Service Requests
 UPDATE
      Defined
 UPLOAD
      Defined
 Uploading
      File
      Files to Exchange
      Text Item to Exchange
 Usage
      Displaying System
      Printing System
      Saving System

 V
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Viewing
      Service Request

 W
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 When Field
      Defined
 WHO'S READ
      Defined
 Wordwrap
      Enabling/Disabling
 Writing
      Electronic Mail Message

