 Microsoft LAN Manager - Administrator's Reference








 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
             Microsoft(R) LAN Manager - Administrator's Reference

                                 VERSION 2.0
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


                            Microsoft Corporation








 Information in this document is subject to change without notice and does
 not represent a commitment on the part of Microsoft Corporation. The
 software described in this document is furnished under a license agreement
 or nondisclosure agreement. The software may be used or copied only in
 accordance with the terms of the agreement. It is against the law to copy
 the software on any medium except as specifically allowed in the license or
 nondisclosure agreement. No part of this manual may be reproduced or
 transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
 photocopying and recording, for any purpose without the express written
 permission of Microsoft Corporation.  The LAN Manager Remoteboot service
 does not in any way amend nor supersede the provisions of the end user
 license agreements for MS-DOS or MS OS/2 ("Microsoft Software"). Those end
 user license agreements limit the use of a given copy of Microsoft Software
 to a single terminal connected to a single computer. They also prohibit the
 use of such Microsoft Software on a network or otherwise on more than one
 computer or computer terminal at the same time. Accordingly, Microsoft
 Software may not be remotely loaded to terminals or workstations unless you
 have a valid Microsoft end user license for each such remoteboot
 workstation.  U.S. Government Restricted Rights  The SOFTWARE and
 Documentation are provided with RESTRICTED RIGHTS. Use, duplication, or
 disclosure by the Government is subject to restrictions as set forth in
 subparagraph (c) (1) (ii) of The Rights in Technical Data and Computer
 Software clause at 252.227-7013 or paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of Commercial
 Computer DocumentationÄRestricted Rights at 48 CFR 52.227-19, as applicable.
 Contractor/Manufacturer is Microsoft Corporation/One Microsoft Way/Redmond,
 Washington 98052-6399.  (C)1990 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.
 Printed in the USA.
  =  Microsoft, MS, MS-DOS, XENIX, and the Microsoft logo
 are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. Windows is a trademark
 of Microsoft Corporation.


 IBM is a registered trademark of International Business
 Machines Corporation.

 EtherNet is a registered trademark of Xerox Corporation.

 Document Number: SY10468-0590
  OEM-P787-2Z






 Table of Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Before You Begin
      How To Use This Manual
      Notational Conventions
      Finding Further Information

 Chapter 1  Introduction

      Using Commands in Batch Programs
      Using Abbreviations
      Using the /yes and /no Options
      Using Special Characters with Commands
      Configuring Services
      Using Passwords
      Controlling Screen Displays
      Managing Remote Servers
      LAN Manager Commands and Utilities Summary
             LAN Manager Commands
             LAN Manager Utilities

 Chapter 2  LAN Manager Commands

             Net
             Net Access
             Net Accounts
             Net Admin
             Net Audit
             Net Comm
             Net Config
             Net Config Peer
             Net Config Server
             Net Config Workstation
             Net Console
             Net Continue
             Net Copy
             Net Device
             Net Error
             Net File
             Net Forward
             Net Group
             Net Help
             Net Helpmsg
             Net Load
             Net Log
             Net Logoff
             Net Logon
             Net Move
             Net Name
             Net Password
             Net Pause
             Net Print
             Net Run
             Net Save
             Net Send
             Net Separator
             Net Session
             Net Share
             Net Start
             Net Start Alerter
             Net Start Messenger
             Net Start Netlogon
             Net Start Netpopup
             Net Start Netrun
             Net Start Peer
             Net Start Remoteboot
             Net Start Replicator
             Net Start Server
             Net Start Timesource
             Net Start UPS
             Net Start Workstation
             Net Statistics
             Net Status
             Net Stop
             Net Time
             Net Use
             Net User
             Net View
             Net Who

 Chapter 3  LAN Manager Utilities

             At
             Backacc
             Cache
             Chkstor
             Errpopup
             Ftadmin
             Ftmonit
             Ftsetup
             Logoff
             Logon
             Makeimg
             Portacc
             Priv
             Restacc
             Rpldsabl
             Rplenabl
             SECURESH.EXE

 Appendix A  The LANMAN Directory

      What the LANMAN Directory Contains
      LANMAN Server Directory
             The LANMAN\ACCOUNTS Directory
             The LANMAN\DOCUPDAT Directory
             The LANMAN\DRIVERS Directory
             The LANMAN\LOGS Directory
             The LANMAN\NETLIB Directory
             The LANMAN\NETPROG Directory
             The LANMAN\PROFILES Directory
             The LANMAN\REPL Directory
             The LANMAN\RPL Directory
             The LANMAN\RPLUSER Directory
             The LANMAN\SERVICES Directory
      LANMAN MS OS/2 Workstation Directory
             The LANMAN\DRIVERS Directory
             The LANMAN\LOGS Directory
             The LANMAN\NETLIB Directory
             The LANMAN\NETPROG Directory
             The LANMAN\PROFILES Directory
             The LANMAN\SERVICES Directory
      LANMAN.DOS Enhanced Directory
             The LANMAN.DOS\DRIVERS Directory
             The LANMAN.DOS\NETPROG Directory
             The LANMAN.DOS\PROFILES Directory
             The LANMAN.DOS\SERVICES Directory
      LANMAN.DOS Basic Directory
             The LANMAN.DOS\BASIC Directory

 Appendix B  The LANMAN.INI File

      How To Override Values
      How To Change File Values
      Why You Change Values
      LANMAN.INI File Conventions
      LANMAN.INI File Sections
             The Networks Section for MS OS/2
             The Networks Section for MS-DOS
             The Workstation Section
             The Messenger Section
             The Netshell Section
             The Server Section
             The Alerter Section
             The Netrun Section
             The Replicator Section
             The UPS Section
             The Netlogon Section
             The Remoteboot Section
             The Services Section
      Sample LANMAN.INI Files
             A Server File
             An MS-DOS File
      Summary Tables
             Networks for MS OS/2
             Networks for MS-DOS
             Workstation
             Messenger
             Netshell
             Server
             Alerter
             Netrun
             Replicator
             UPS
             Netlogon
             Remoteboot
             Services

 Appendix C  Country Codes


 Glossary


 Index




 Before You Begin
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The Microsoft(R) LAN Manager Administrator's Reference is written for
 administrators of Microsoft LAN Manager. It contains reference information
 about LAN Manager commands and utilities for computers with Microsoft
 Operating System/2 (MS(R) OS/2), the LAN Manager program directory and
 initialization file, and country codes.

 This manual assumes that you understand the terminology and concepts for
 administering a LAN Manager network. If you need help with a term or concept
 not explained in this manual, and for a full explanation about how to use
 the LAN Manager Screen, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.


 It is also assumed that you understand MS OS/2. If you are not familiar with
 MS OS/2, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).

 For an explanation of terms and concepts basic to a local-area network and
 to LAN Manager, read Getting To Know Microsoft LAN Manager and the Microsoft
 LAN Manager User's Guide.


 How To Use This Manual

 This manual contains the following chapters and appendixes:

 Chapter 1, "Introduction"
   Provides general instructions for using LAN Manager commands and utilities
   typed at the MS OS/2 prompt. It includes lists of available commands and
   utilities.

 Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands"
   Provides alphabetical reference pages that explain the purpose, syntax,
   and general use of each LAN Manager command for MS OS/2. Examples, and
   references to related topics, are included. LAN Manager commands include
   commands that require administrative privilege, as well as user's
   commands, which are also documented in the Microsoft LAN Manager User's
   Guide.

 Chapter 3, "LAN Manager Utilities"
   Provides alphabetical reference pages that explain the purpose, syntax,
   and general use of each LAN Manager utility. Examples, and references to
   related topics, are included.

 The appendixes provide supplementary information about the following topics:


 Appendix A, "The LANMAN Directory"
   Describes the directory tree for the LAN Manager software.

 Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"
   Explains the purpose of entries in the LAN Manager initialization file,
   LANMAN.INI, giving the ranges of values and the default values.
   Information is also provided about how to modify the entries for the
   requirements of the individual server or workstation. Listings of sample
   LANMAN.INI files are also included.

 Appendix C, "Country Codes"
   Lists the codes used to display LAN Manager messages in one of 19
   available languages. The country code is assigned through a user's
   account.

 Additionally, this manual provides a glossary and an index.


 Notational Conventions

 This manual uses different type styles and special characters for different
 purposes:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Bold                              Represents commands, command options,
                                   and file entries. Type the words exactly
                                   as they appear, for example, net use.

 Italic                            Introduces new terms and represents
                                   variables. For example, the variable
                                   computername indicates that you supply
                                   the name of a workstation or server.

 Monospace                         Represents examples, screen displays,
                                   program code, and error messages.
 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  program code, and error messages.

 FULL CAPS                         Represent filenames and pathnames in
                                   text. You can, however, type entries in
                                   uppercase or lowercase letters.

 SMALL CAPS                        Represent key names (such as CTRL or F2).

 KEY+KEY                           Indicates that you must press two keys
                                   at the same time. For example, "Press
                                   CTRL+Z" means to hold down CTRL and
                                   press Z.

 {braces}                          Enclose required items in syntax
                                   statements. For example, {yes | no}
                                   indicates that you must specify yes or
                                   no when using the command. Type only the
                                   information within the braces, not the
                                   braces themselves.
 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  braces themselves.

 (continued)

 [brackets]                        Enclose optional items in syntax
                                   statements. For example, [password]
                                   indicates a password may be needed with
                                   the command. Type only the information
                                   within the brackets, not the brackets
                                   themselves.

 | (vertical bar)                  Separates items within braces or
                                   brackets. For example, {/hold | /release
                                   | /delete} indicates that only one of
                                   the three options can be used.

 ... (ellipsis)                    In syntax statements, indicates that you
                                   can repeat the previous item(s). For
                                   example, /route:devicename[,...]
 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  example, /route:devicename[,...]
                                   indicates that you can specify more than
                                   one device, putting a comma between the
                                   devicenames.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Finding Further Information

 In addition to this manual, the LAN Manager manual set includes the
 following:

 Getting To Know Microsoft LAN Manager
   Gives first-time network users an introduction to local-area networks and
   to LAN Manager.

 Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide for MS OS/2
   Provides guide and reference information about using LAN Manager on MS
   OS/2 workstations.

 Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide for MS-DOS
   Provides guide and reference information about using LAN Manager Enhanced
   and Basic on MS-DOS(R) workstations.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Installation Guide
   Provides information about installing LAN Manager software and using the
   Setup program to configure workstations and servers.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide
   Provides detailed information about administering the LAN Manager network.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide
   Provides information about network device drivers that can be used with
   LAN Manager.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Programmer's Reference
   Provides information about LAN Manager Application Program Interfaces
   (APIs). (This manual is optionally available.)

 Quick references are also available for users and administrators.






 Chapter 1  Introduction
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter provides general information about how to use LAN Manager
 commands. For a listing of the LAN Manager commands and utilities, and a
 summary of what they are used for, see the "LAN Manager Commands and
 Utilities Summary" section, later in this chapter.

 For information about administrative tasks and using the LAN Manager Screen,
 see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.


 Using Commands in Batch Programs

 LAN Manager commands can be used in batch programs (.CMD and .BAT files),
 such as STARTUP.CMD. You can use commands to start the Workstation and
 Server services, log on to the network, and make connections to shared
 resources.

 For example, to automatically start the Workstation and Server services,
 include the following command in the STARTUP.CMD file:

   net start server


 Using Abbreviations

 The command reference pages in Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands," and
 Chapter 3, "LAN Manager Utilities," always use the full command names,
 command options, and service names; however, the LAN Manager software
 recognizes abbreviations. You can abbreviate any command option by typing
 enough letters to distinguish it from other command options. For example,
 the following syntax is for the net accounts command:

   net accounts [/forcelogoff:{minutes | no}]
   [/minpwlen:length]
   [/maxpwage:{days | unlimited}] [/minpwage:days]
   [/uniquepw:number]

 You can abbreviate the options as illustrated in the following example:

   net accounts /f:10 /minpwl:6 /ma:unlimited /minpwa:7 /u:3

 Note that you cannot abbreviate option values (the unlimited option for
 /maxpwage).

 The following LAN Manager services recognize the abbreviations and synonyms
 listed:

 Workstation
   wksta, work, redirector, redir, rdr, prdr, devrdr

 Messenger
   msg, receiver

 Netrun
   runserver, runservr, runsrv

 Peer
   peer_server, ps, server, srv, svr

 Remoteboot
   ripl

 Replicator
   replicat, repl

 Server
   srv, svr


 Using the /yes and /no Options

 For some commands, LAN Manager issues a prompt that requires a user response
 before a task can be completed. To expedite a command that requires a user
 response, you can append the /yes or /no option in anticipation of the
 prompt.

 For example, the Netlogon service requires that the Server and Workstation
 services be running. If these services aren't running, LAN Manager prompts
 for confirmation that you want the services started.

 For example, to start the Netlogon service, type

   net start netlogon

 LAN Manager returns the following confirmation prompt if the Workstation
 service isn't running:

   The WORKSTATION is not started. Is it OK to start it? (Y/N)
   [Y]:

 To proceed, type Y or press ENTER.

 LAN Manager displays the following messages and issues another prompt to
 start the Server service:

   The WORKSTATION service is starting....
   The WORKSTATION service was started successfully.
   The SERVER is not started.
   Is it OK to start it? (Y/N) [Y]:

 To proceed, type Y or press ENTER.

 The following example shows how to start the Workstation, Server, and
 Netlogon services without getting confirmation prompts. Type

   net start netlogon /yes

 LAN Manager starts each service and displays messages as the service starts.



 Using Special Characters with Commands

 A computername, sharename, username, or groupname can contain an MS OS/2
 special character (for example, ^ or &). To type a name with a special
 character in a LAN Manager command, use the MS OS/2 escape character (^)
 before the character.

 For example, to log on with the username marksp and the password mrkt&dev,
 type

   net logon marksp mrkt^&dev

 The escape character is not needed when typing a special character in a LAN
 Manager Screen dialog box.


 Configuring Services

 LAN Manager services have options. These options are also entries in the
 LANMAN.INI file. The values of these options can be changed to best suit
 your network needs.

 There are three methods for choosing configuration values for LAN Manager
 services:


   ş   To use a value for as long as the service is running, supply the value
       when you start the service, using the net start command or the LAN
       Manager Screen.

   ş   To use the values listed in the LANMAN.INI file, don't supply values
       when you start the service.

   ş   To use the default value coded into the LAN Manager software, don't
       supply a value when you start the service, and comment out or delete
       the entry in the LANMAN.INI file.


 Most commonly, when you want to change the value of a service option you
 will want the setting to be permanent. In this case, use a text editor or
 the Setup program to change the value in the LANMAN.INI file.

 To make a temporary change, specify the option and value when you start the
 service. This way, the value you specify will be in effect while the service
 is running.

 For information about how to supply a value from the command line, see the
 Net Start service entry in Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands." For
 information about how to use the initialization file, see Appendix B, "The
 LANMAN.INI File." For information about how to supply a value using the LAN
 Manager Screen, see Chapter 2 in the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 Guide.


 Using Passwords

 When using net commands that require a password, you can supply a password
 in one of two ways: you can type the password or you can type an asterisk
 (*). If you use an asterisk, LAN Manager issues a prompt requesting the
 password before processing the command. When you type the password in
 response to the request, the password is not displayed.


 Controlling Screen Displays

 Some displays provide more than one screenful of information. For example,
 the following command provides several screens of information:

   net help config server /options

 To display information one screen at a time, use the more command. For
 example:

   net help config server /options | more

 When you have examined one screen of information and are ready to proceed,
 press any key to display the next screen of text.


 Managing Remote Servers

 When you administer a server while you are working at that server's
 keyboard, the server is called the local server. With LAN Manager, you can
 also administer a server while working at any other MS OS/2 workstation or
 MS-DOS workstation running LAN Manager Enhanced. In this case, the server
 you are administering is the remote server.

 To remotely administer a server with user-level security, you must have an
 account with admin privilege on that server. To remotely administer a server
 with share-level security, you must make a connection to the server's ADMIN$
 resource, which may be protected by a password.

 To use the LAN Manager Screen to remotely administer a server, type

 net admin \\computername

 To use the command line to remotely administer a server, type

 net admin \\computername /command

 To end the remote administration session, type exit or press CTRL+Z.

 For more information about remote administration, see Net Admin, Chapter 2,
 "LAN Manager Commands."


 LAN Manager Commands and Utilities Summary

 Some topics are not fully described in this manual. For example, to use the
 three LAN Manager Screens, this manual describes the commands (net, net
 admin, and net console) and how to start the screens, but it does not
 explain how to use the LAN Manager Screen elements. To learn how to use the
 LAN Manager Screen menus, menu commands, dialog boxes, and dialog box
 fields, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide and the
 Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide.

 Some commands (for example, net user) are not available to a user who does
 not have administrative privilege or special operator privileges. Commands
 that are available to a user, or that have operations that are available to
 a user, are also documented in the Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide.


 LAN Manager Commands

 The following list provides the name and purpose for each LAN Manager
 command:

 net
   Starts the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen.

 net access
   Displays or modifies resource permissions and audit options on servers
   with user-level security.

 net accounts
   Displays or sets the role of servers in a domain, and displays or modifies
   password and logon requirements for the user accounts on a server.

 net admin
   Starts the administrator's version of the LAN Manager Screen for a local
   or remote server, runs a single LAN Manager or operating system command on
   a remote server, or starts a command processor on a remote server.

 net audit
   Displays or clears audit trail entries.

 net comm
   Controls or displays information about communication-device queues.

 net config
   Displays configurable services that are running, or displays or changes
   settings for a service.

 net config peer
   Displays or changes settings for the Peer service while it is running.

 net config server
   Displays or changes settings for the Server service while it is running.

 net config workstation
   Displays or changes settings for the Workstation service while it is
   running.

 net console
   Starts the console version of the LAN Manager Screen.

 net continue
   Reactivates suspended services or shared printers.

 net copy
   Copies files from a source to a destination.

 net device
   Displays information about shared printers and communication devices, or
   controls active print jobs and communication-device requests.

 net error
   Displays or clears the error log.

 net file
   Displays the names of all open shared files and the number of file locks,
   if any, on each file. This command also closes shared files and removes
   file locks.

 net forward
   Routes incoming messages from one alias to another.

 net group
   Adds, displays, or modifies groups on servers with user-level security.

 net help
   Provides a list of commands and topics for which you can get help, or
   provides help with a specific command or topic.

 net helpmsg
   Provides help for a LAN Manager error message.

 net load
   Loads a profile.

 net log
   Controls or displays information about message logging.

 net logoff
   Logs a username off from the network.

 net logon
   Logs a username on to the network.

 net move
   Moves file(s) from a source to a destination.

 net name
   Adds or deletes an alias, or displays a list of aliases.

 net password
   Changes the password for a user account on a server or in a domain.

 net pause
   Pauses services or shared printers.

 net print
   Displays or controls print jobs and printer queues, or sets or modifies
   options for a printer queue.

 net run
   Runs a program on a server.

 net save
   Saves a profile.

 net send
   Sends messages or files to other computers or users on the network.

 net separator
   Prints or cancels printing of a separator page before each print job in a
   printer queue or on a printer.

 net session
   Lists or disconnects sessions between a server and workstations.

 net share
   Creates, deletes, or displays shared resources.

 net start
   Starts a service, or displays a list of started services.

 net start alerter
   Starts the Alerter service. The Alerter service sends alert messages.

 net start messenger
   Starts the Messenger service. The Messenger service enables a workstation
   to receive messages and controls message logging.

 net start netlogon
   Starts the Netlogon service. The Netlogon service verifies logon requests
   and controls replication of the domainwide user accounts database.

 net start netpopup
   Starts the Netpopup service. The Netpopup service causes network messages
   to display on the computer's screen.

 net start netrun
   Starts the Netrun service. The Netrun service lets users, from their
   workstations, run programs on the server's processor.

 net start peer
   Starts the Peer service. The Peer service enables a workstation to perform
   most server functions.

 net start remoteboot
   Starts the Remoteboot service. The Remoteboot service provides boot
   software for workstations.

 net start replicator
   Starts the Replicator service. The Replicator service ensures that
   designated files are identical on specified servers.

 net start server
   Starts the Server service. The Server service enables a computer to share
   resources on the network.

 net start timesource
   Starts the Timesource service. The Timesource service designates a server
   as the time source for a domain.

 net start ups
   Starts the UPS (uninterruptible power supply) service. The UPS service is
   used with a battery to protect a server from data loss during a power
   failure.

 net start workstation
   Starts the Workstation service. The Workstation service enables a computer
   to connect to and use network resources.

 net statistics
   Displays or clears the statistics log.

 net status
   Displays configuration settings and shared resources on the local server.

 net stop
   Stops a service.

 net time
   Synchronizes the workstation's clock with that of a server or domain, or
   displays the time for a server or domain.

 net use
   Connects a workstation to or disconnects a workstation from a shared
   resource, or displays information about workstation connections.

 net user
   Adds or modifies user accounts or displays user account information on
   servers with user-level security.

 net view
   Displays a list of servers or displays resources being shared by a server.

 net who
   Lists usernames currently logged on to the network.


 LAN Manager Utilities

 The following list provides the name and purpose for each LAN Manager
 utility:

 at
   Schedules commands or programs to run on a server at the specified time or
   date.

 backacc
   Backs up the permissions for high-performance file system 386 (HPFS386)
   volumes, and backs up the NET.ACC and NET.AUD files.

 cache
   Sets up file system caching for high-performance file system 386 (HPFS386)
   volumes.

 chkstor
   Checks the amount of storage used for home directories on a server.

 errpopup
   Executes a program and displays any error messages from the program in a
   popup window.

 ftadmin
   Starts the fault-tolerance system, which is a full-screen MS OS/2
   application that runs in a Presentation Manager window.

 ftmonit
   Controls the fault-tolerance system's error-monitoring feature.

 ftsetup
   Installs the fault-tolerance system, and prompts for information needed to
   configure drive mirroring and drive duplexing.

 logoff
   Logs a username off from a 386 server with local security, or logs a
   username off from the network.

 logon
   Logs a username on at a 386 server with local security, but not on to the
   network.

 makeimg
   Packages all of the system programs on a floppy disk into an image file.

 portacc
   Converts a LAN Manager 1.x user accounts database to a LAN Manager 2.0
   user accounts database. It also preserves permissions established for
   server resources.

 priv
   Ensures that a background process started by an administrator on a 386
   server with local security remains privileged after the administrator logs
   off.

 restacc
   Restores the permissions for high-performance file system 386 (HPFS386)
   volumes that have been stored with the backacc utility.

 rpldsabl
   Disables the Remoteboot service at a workstation that has a hard disk.

 rplenabl
   Enables the Remoteboot service at a workstation that has a hard disk.

 SECURESH.EXE
   Implements local security on the high-performance file system 386
   (HPFS386) partitions of a 386 server with user-level security. This
   program is started from the CONFIG.SYS file.








 Chapter 2  LAN Manager Commands
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter provides a reference page for each LAN Manager command. The
 purpose and syntax for the command, as well as comments, examples, and
 cross-references, are provided in the command reference page. The command
 reference pages are arranged in alphabetical order.

 For a summary of the names and purpose statements for LAN Manager commands
 and utilities, see the "LAN Manager Commands and Utilities Summary" section
 in Chapter 1.


 Net
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net command starts the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen.


 Syntax

 net [/mono]

 where

 /mono
   Improves the LAN Manager Screen display for some computer screens. Try the
   command with and without /mono to determine which display you prefer.


 Comments

 Use the net command to display the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen.
 A screen similar to the following appears:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book.)

 From this screen, you can use menus and dialog boxes to perform LAN Manager
 tasks rather than typing LAN Manager commands from the MS OS/2 command line.


 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Using the administrator's         Microsoft LAN Manager Adminstrator's
 versions of the LAN Manager       Guide; Net Admin and Net Console
 Screen

 Using the user's version of the   Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
 LAN Manager Screen


 Net Access
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net access command displays or modifies resource permissions and audit
 options on servers with user-level security.


 Syntax

 net access [resource]

 net access resource [/add [name:permission[ ...]] | /delete]

   net access resource [/grant name:permission[
   ...] | /change name:permission[ ...]
   | /revoke name[ ...]]

 net access resource [/tree]

 net access resource [/trail:{yes | no}]

 net access resource /failure[:{all | none | event[;...]}]

 net access resource /success[:{all | none | event[;...]}]

 where

 resource
   Is a disk, directory (absolute path), file (absolute path), \PRINT
   (printer queue), \COMM (communication-device queue), or \PIPE (named pipe)
   for which permissions are to be assigned.

 name:permission[ ...]
   Provides the existing username or groupname with one or more permissions
   (RWCXDAPYN). Do not use a delimiter when typing permissions (for example,
   RWC). Separate multiple name:permission entries with a space. For a
   description of each permission, see the following section.

 name[ ...]
   Is a username or groupname. Separate multiple name entries with a space.

 directory
   Is the absolute pathname of a directory.

 event
   Is the type of event to audit. Separate multiple event entries with a
   semicolon (;). Events are

     open
       Determines an audit when files are opened.

     write
       Determines an audit when files are written to.

     delete
       Determines an audit when a file is deleted.

     acl
       Determines an audit when the existing list of permissions (access
       control list) for a resource is changed.

 /add
   Adds permissions for the resource and optionally grants one or more users
   or groups permissions for the resource. Separate multiple name:permission
   entries with a space.

 /delete
   Removes all permissions for a resource from the user accounts database.

 /grant
   Adds one or more user's or group's permissions for a resource. Separate
   multiple name:permission entries with a space.

 /change
   Changes one or more user's or group's permissions for a resource. Separate
   multiple name:permission entries with a space.

 /revoke
   Revokes one or more user's or group's permissions for a resource.

 /tree
   Displays permissions for a directory and all of its subdirectories, or
   displays permissions for all \PRINT, \COMM, or \PIPE resources. For
   example, net access \print /tree displays the permissions for all printer
   queues on the server.

 /trail:{yes | no}
   Turns audit trailing on or off for all types of access to a resource. The
   default is no. The /trail option cannot be on the same command line with
   the /failure or /success options.

 /failure:
   Selects which failed resource accesses are audited, as determined by
   event.

 all
   Determines an audit for all access to a resource.

 none
   Determines no audits for access to a resource.

 /success:
   Selects which successful resource accesses are audited, as determined by
   event.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Resource audit records are written only if the value of the Server service's
 auditing option is yes or lists resource. The auditing option is set using
 the net start server command or with the auditing entry in the [server]
 section of the LANMAN.INI file.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To display a list of the server's resources and the permissions for the
 resources, type net access without options.


 Comments

 Use the net access command to secure network resources by specifying who can
 use each resource and how. You can grant permissions to users and to groups.


 When LAN Manager displays resource permissions, it designates groups with an
 asterisk (*). Typing net access results in a display of permissions similar
 to the following:

   Resource  Permissions
   ______________________________________________________
   \COMM
             *USERS:RWC

   \PIPE
             *USERS:RW

   \PRINT
             *USERS:C

   C:\LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS\SCRIPTS
             *USERS:RX     JOHNSW:RWCD         DALENA:(none)

   C:\LANMAN\REPL\IMPORT\SCRIPTS
             *USERS:RX     JOHNSW:RWCD

 The following list shows the types of permissions that can be assigned for
 directories and files, and what each permission allows a user to do:

 R (Read)
   User can read and copy files, run programs, and change from one
   subdirectory to another within the shared directory. User can also read
   the extended attributes of files.

 W (Write)
   User can write the contents and extended attributes of a file.

   Note that when a user with an MS-DOS workstation opens a shared file to
   write to it, and then truncates the file, the file is recreated.
   Therefore, to give users with MS-DOS workstations full write access to a
   file, assign them C permission as well as W permission.

 C (Create)
   User can create files and subdirectories within a shared directory. After
   creating a file, a user with C permission can read from or write to the
   file and its extended attributes only until closing it.

 D (Delete)
   User can delete files and subdirectories within the shared directory but
   can't delete the shared directory itself.

 X (Execute)
   User can run a file (but not read or copy it). Only MS OS/2 workstations
   recognize X permission. To allow a user with an MS-DOS workstation to run
   a program, grant that user R permission.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 X permission isn't needed if R permission is assigned to the user for that
 directory or file. R permission includes all rights that X permission
 grants.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 A (Change Attributes)
   User can set the physical file flags of the file.

 P (Change Permissions)
   User can change the permissions for the directory or file. Giving a user P
   permission for a directory allows the user to change the permissions for
   only that directory, not to change the permissions for any subdirectories
   of the directory.

 Y (Yes)
   Gives the user RWCDA permissions. Y serves as an abbreviation for this set
   of permissions.

 N (No)
   Prevents the user from accessing the directory or file. Use this
   permission to exclude individual users from access to a directory or file,
   despite whatever permissions are assigned to the groups to which that user
   belongs. You can assign N permission only to individual users.

 When assigning permissions or auditing information for a non-disk resource
 (\PRINT, \COMM, or \PIPE), type the resource specification before the
 sharename (for example, \PRINT\LASER). Then set Y (Yes), N (No), and P
 (Change Permissions) permissions for these non-disk resources. To give a
 print resource user Y (Yes) and P (Change Permissions) permissions, type CP
 as the permission string. To give non-disk resource users these permissions,
 type RWCP as the permission string.

 Permissions assigned to a directory automatically become the permissions for
 subdirectories and files unless specific permissions are assigned to the
 subdirectory or file. If specific permissions are assigned to a subdirectory
 or file, they override the permissions assigned to the parent directory.

 When a server is installed, only the default resources \PRINT, \COMM, and
 \PIPE have permissions. To grant permissions for a resource that doesn't
 have permissions, use the /add option. To modify permissions for a resource
 that has permissions, use the /grant, /change, and /delete options.


 Examples


   a.  To add permissions for the C:\BIN directory and grant permissions to
       the user mikeg and the groups pubrel and users, type

       net access c:\bin /add mikeg:rwxc pubrel:rw users:r


   b.  To add read and write permissions for jennyt, type

       net access c:\bin /grant jennyt:rw


   c.  To configure auditing for the C:\READ.ME file so that all failed
       attempts to access the file and all successful changes to the user
       account permission list (acl) are audited, type

       net access c:\read.me /failure:all /success:acl



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up and managing network   Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 user accounts and security        Guide, Part 2

 Assigning permissions to          Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 share-level resources             Guide, Chapter 5; Net Share

 LAN Manager's auditing            Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 capabilities                      Guide, Chapter 16

 Displaying and clearing the       Net Audit
 audit trail


 Net Accounts
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net accounts command displays or sets the role of servers in a domain,
 and displays or modifies password and logon requirements for the user
 accounts on a server.


 Syntax

 net accounts [/role:{primary | backup | member | standalone}]

   net accounts [/forcelogoff:{minutes | no}]
   [/minpwlen:length]
   [/maxpwage:{days | unlimited}] [/minpwage:days]
   [/uniquepw:number]

 where

 /role:
   Determines if the server verifies logon requests and if it uses the
   domain's user accounts database. Four roles are provided:

     primary
       Specifies that the server is the primary domain controller. Additions
       and changes to the domain's user accounts database occur only on the
       primary domain controller. This server can also verify logon requests.
       A domain can have only one primary domain controller.

     backup
       Specifies that the server is a backup domain controller. It uses a
       copy of the domain's user accounts database and can verify logon
       requests.

     member
       Specifies that the server is a member server. It uses a copy of the
       domain's user accounts database but can't verify logon requests.

     standalone
       Specifies a server with user-level security that maintains its own
       user accounts database and does not participate in domain logon.

 /forcelogoff:{minutes | no}
   Sets the number of minutes to wait before ending a user's session with the
   server when the user account or valid logon time expires. The no option
   prevents forced logoff. The default is no.

 /minpwlen:length
   Sets the minimum number of characters for a user account password. The
   range is 0-14; the default is 6 characters.

 /maxpwage:{days | unlimited}
   Sets the maximum number of days that a user account's password is valid. A
   value of unlimited sets no maximum time. The /maxpwage option must be
   greater than /minpwage. The range is 1-49710 (unlimited); the default is
   90 days.

 /minpwage:days
   Sets the minimum number of days before a user can change a new password. A
   value of 0 sets no minimum time. The range is 0-49710; the default is 0
   days.

 /uniquepw:number
   Requires that a user's passwords be unique through number password
   changes. The range is 0-8; the default is 5 password changes.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Password restrictions control the net password command. You can always
 change a password with the net user command.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Type net accounts to display the current settings for password and logon
 limitations and the role of a server. If the role of the server is backup or
 member, the name of the primary domain controller is displayed. If the role
 of the server is primary, backup, or member, the name of the domain is also
 displayed.


 Comments

 Use the net accounts command to set server roles that determine how the
 Netlogon service works at the server. The Netlogon service cannot be running
 when you change a server role, and /role cannot be on the same command line
 as other options.

 In each domain, set up only one primary domain controller to maintain the
 user accounts database and replicate it to any number of backup domain
 controllers and member servers.

 If you have a new server that you want to be primary in an existing domain,
 designate it as backup or member first. When you start the Netlogon service,
 the database is automatically replicated to the server. (You could also use
 the backacc and restacc utilities to transfer the user accounts database.)
 Stop the Netlogon service to change the server role to primary, and make
 sure it is the only primary domain controller in the domain. The Netlogon
 service does not start if more than one server is designated primary.

 The net accounts command options also set the logon and password
 requirements for user accounts on a server. This information is stored in
 the LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\NET.ACC file, along with user accounts and resource
 permissions.

 When the /forcelogoff:minutes option is specified, LAN Manager sends a
 warning two minutes before it forces the user off from the network. If any
 files are open, LAN Manager warns the user. If minutes is less than two, LAN
 Manager warns the user to log off from the network immediately.


 Examples


   a.  To display the current settings for forced logoff, the password
       requirements, and the server role, type

       net accounts


   b.  To set a minimum of seven characters for user account passwords, type

       net accounts /minpwlen:7


   c.  To specify that no password can be used more than every fifth time a
       password is changed, type

       net accounts /uniquepw:5


   d.  To prevent users from changing passwords more often than every 7 days,
       and to force all users to change passwords every 30 days, type

       net accounts /minpwage:7 /maxpwage:30



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up user accounts          Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapters 3 and 4; Net User

 Starting the Netlogon service     Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 4; Net Start Netlogon

 Copying the user accounts         Chapter 3, "LAN Manager Utilities,"
 database                          Backacc and Restacc


 Net Admin
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net admin command starts the administrator's version of the LAN Manager
 Screen for a local or remote server, runs a single LAN Manager or operating
 system command on a remote server, or starts a command processor on a remote
 server.


 Syntax

 net admin [/mono]

 net admin \\computername [password | *] [/mono]

 net admin \\computername [password | *] /command [command]

 where

 \\computername
   Specifies a remote server.

 password
   Is the administrator's password for the specified server.

 *
   Produces a prompt for the password. The password will not be displayed
   when you type it.

 command
   Is a single command.

 /mono
   Improves the LAN Manager Screen display for some computer screens. Try the
   command with and without /mono to determine which display you prefer.

 /command
   Runs a single noninteractive command, or starts a secondary command
   processor (similar to MS OS/2 CMD.EXE) on a remote server.

 To display the administrator's version of the LAN Manager Screen with the
 current focus set on the local server, type net admin without options.


 Comments

 Use the net admin command to display the administrator's version of the LAN
 Manager Screen. After you type net admin, a screen similar to the following
 appears:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book.)

 When you type net admin \\computername, the LAN Manager Screen is displayed
 with the current focus set on the remote server. You must have
 administrative privilege on this server.

 To start a secondary command processor on a remote server, press ENTER
 immediately following  /command. Use this method when you want to remotely
 administer a server from a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation. Then, to return
 to the local server, type exit or press CTRL+Z.

 When executing a command on a remote server, the command processor prompts
 for commands, executes them, and returns output to the local screen. If you
 don't include a full pathname for a command, LAN Manager assumes the path is
 LANMAN\NETPROG.

 When using the /command option, use quotation marks in two cases: when /yes
 or /no is part of the command to be run or when the command has a multiword
 option value. For example, the following conditions require quotation marks:



   ş   To clarify how to group pieces such as strings. For example:

       net admin \\production /command "net stop server /yes"


   ş   If a command line ends with a backslash (\), and you are enclosing the
       string in quotation marks, add an extra space or another backslash
       before the ending quotation mark. For example:

       net admin \\production /command "net share x=c:\\"


       net admin \\production /command "net share x=c:\ "


   ş   If a command includes a multiword option, enclose the command in one
       set of quotation marks and the option and option values in another
       set. Precede each of the inner quotation marks with a backslash. For
       example:

       net admin \\production /command "net config server
                 /srvcomment:\"Remote Server 1\""




 Examples


   a.  To start the administrator's version of the LAN Manager Screen with
       the current focus set on the remote server \\PRODUCTION, type

       net admin \\production


   b.  To start a command processor at \\PRODUCTION, type

       net admin \\production /command


       When you press ENTER, you see the message

       Type Exit or CTRL+Z to exit.

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Using the administrator's         Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 version of the LAN Manager        Guide, Chapter 2
 Screen

 Starting the user's version of    Net
 the LAN Manager Screen

 Starting the console version of   Net Console
 the LAN Manager Screen

 Running application programs      Net Run and Net Start Netrun
 over the network




 Net Audit
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net audit command displays or clears audit trail entries.


 Syntax

 net audit [/count:number] [/reverse]

 net audit /delete

 where

 /count:number
   Displays the last number of audit trail entries.

 /reverse
   Displays the audit trail entries in reverse order (newest to oldest). When
   used with /count:number, it displays the specified number of entries in
   reverse order.

 /delete
   Clears the server's audit trail.

 To get a display of all audit trail entries on the server, type net audit
 without options.


 Comments

 Use the net audit command to help you monitor network activities. The
 command reports the following types of activities:


   ş   Starting, stopping, pausing, and continuing services

   ş   Initiating and deleting server sessions

   ş   Adding or deleting shared resources

   ş   Starting and ending access to a shared resource

   ş   Failed attempts to access shared resources


 LAN Manager audit trail entries are stored in the LANMAN\LOGS\NET.AUD file.
 An audit trail includes the username of the person who used the resource,
 the type of resource, and the date and time of use.

 A display at a server with user-level security is similar to the following:


   Username               Type           Date
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
       SERVER Installed
   ***                    Server         05-31-90 11:19am
       WORKSTATION Paused
   ***                    Server         05-31-90 11:46am
       Server paused
       WORKSTATION Installed
   ***                    Server         05-31-90 11:46am
       Server continued
   ***                    Service        05-31-90 11:46am
   SALESEAST              Session        05-31-90 12:03pm
       Bad password
   MARIANT                Account        05-31-90 02:54pm
       Group account exec was added
   ***                    Service        06-01-90 11:37am
       REMOTEBOOT Stopped
   ***                    Service        06-01-90 11:37am

 Before any information is stored in the audit trail, you must turn auditing
 on by setting the server's auditing option to yes or selected events. You
 can further modify auditing with the noauditing option. The /auditing option
 is set using the net start server command, or with the auditing and
 noauditing entries in the [server] section of the LANMAN.INI file.

 For a server with user-level security, you can also selectively audit
 individual shared resources after auditing is turned on. Use the /trail or
 /success and /failure options of the net access command to track activity
 for resources.

 For a server with share-level security, only the server options affect
 auditing.


 Examples


   a.  To display the audit trail for the local server, and prevent the
       display from scrolling, type

       net audit | more


   b.  To display audit trail entries from newest to oldest, type

       net audit /reverse


   c.  To clear the audit trail, type

       net audit /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Turning auditing on and           Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File";
 specifying audited events         Net Start Server

 Setting up resources for          Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 auditing                          Guide, Chapter 16; Net Share

 Setting up auditing for           Net Access
 resources on servers with
 user-level security


 Net Comm
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net comm command controls or displays information about
 communication-device queues.


 Syntax


 For a server:

 net comm [devicename | sharename]

 net comm sharename [/priority:number] [/route:devicename[,...]] [/options]

 net comm {[\\computername\]sharename | devicename} /purge


 For a workstation:

 net comm {\\computername[\sharename] | devicename}

 net comm {\\computername\sharename | devicename} [/purge]

 where

 devicename
   Is the name of the local communication device redirected to the
   communication-device queue (comm queue).

 sharename
   Is the name of the comm queue.

 \\computername
   Is a server other than the local server. If you use \\computername with
   sharename, separate the names with a backslash (\).

 \\computername\sharename
   Is the network path for the comm queue.

 /priority:number
   Sets a priority for the comm queue. Priorities range from 1-9 (1 is the
   highest priority); the default is 5.

 /route:devicename
   Specifies which devices service the comm queue. Separate multiple
   devicename entries with a comma or semicolon (;).

 /options
   Displays the options assigned to the comm queue.

 /purge
   Removes the workstation's or server's pending requests from the comm
   queue, but does not affect the currently active requests. For information
   about how to end an active request, see Net Device.

 To get a display of information about comm queues on the local server, type
 net comm without options.


 Comments


 At a server:

 Use the net comm command to control a comm queue that has been shared (see
 Net Share). Communication devices attached to a server are shared on the
 network by a comm queue. A communication device is a COM or LPT connection
 on the local computer.

 More than one communication device can service requests for a comm queue,
 and more than one comm queue can be routed to a device. One reason to assign
 more than one queue to a communication device (or devices) is to give one
 group priority over another group.


 At a workstation:

 Use the net comm command to determine which comm queues are busy, to purge
 your requests, and to see where your request is in the comm queue.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 When you specify a devicename or a network pathname with the net comm /purge
 command, only the requests sent by the workstation where the /purge command
 is issued are removed. This is the case whether the /purge command is issued
 by a user or an administrator.

 When you specify a sharename with the net comm /purge command, all requests
 are removed from the queue. This command can be performed only by
 administrators.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Examples


   a.  To display information about communication devices on the local
       server, type

       net comm


   b.  To display the contents of the MODEM comm queue, type

       net comm modem


   c.  To view the priorities assigned to the MODEM comm queue on the local
       server, type

       net comm modem /options


   d.  To assign the MODEM comm queue the lowest priority, type

       net comm modem /priority:9


   e.  To specify a new route for the MODEM comm queue's requests, type

       net comm modem /route:com2:


   f.  To reduce the work load for a modem queued as USERCOMM, add the modem
       attached to the server's COM2 port to the USERCOMM route. Type

       net comm usercomm /route:com1:;com2:


   g.  To purge all requests from the MODEM comm queue, type

       net comm modem /purge



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Using the LAN Manager Screen to   Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 configure and share comm queues   Guide, Chapter 9

 Controlling individual devices    Net Device
 within comm queues

 Sharing comm queues               Net Share

 Using shared resources            Net Use

 Using comm queues                 Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
                                   for MSOS/2





 Net Config
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net config command displays configurable services that are running, or
 displays or changes settings for a service.


 Syntax

 net config [service [options]]

 where

 service
   Is a service that can be configured with the net config command: peer,
   server, or workstation.

 options
   Are specific to the service. Reference pages for the Peer, Server, and
   Workstation services follow this entry.

 To display a list of configurable services, type net config without options.



 Comments

 Use the net config service command to temporarily change configurable
 service options that don't require stopping and restarting the service. If
 you want the change to be permanent, use an editor or the Setup program to
 change the value for the corresponding LANMAN.INI entry. For the change to
 take effect, stop and restart the service.


 Example

 To view which configurable services are running, type

   net config

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Configuring the Peer service      Net Config Peer

 Configuring the Server service    Net Config Server

 Configuring the Workstation       Net Config Workstation
 service

 Changing settings when starting   Net Start
 the service


 Net Config Peer
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net config peer command displays or changes settings for the Peer
 service while it is running.


 Syntax

 net config peer [options]

 where

 options
   Are the same as options for net config server with the exception that, for
   the Peer service, the /autodisconnect option is permanently set to -1
   (never disconnect) in the software.

 To display the current configuration for a workstation running the Peer
 service, type net config peer without options.


 Comments

 Use the net config peer command to temporarily change configurable Peer
 service options that don't require stopping and restarting the service. If
 you want the change to be permanent, use an editor or the Setup program to
 change the value for the corresponding LANMAN.INI entry. For the change to
 take effect, stop and restart the service.

 The display for net config peer has the same information as the one for net
 config server except "Idle session time" is always -1, and "Software
 version" refers to the Peer service.

 Not all Peer service options can be changed using the net config peer
 command. For additional options, see Net Start Peer.


 Examples


   a.  To display the current settings for the Peer service, type

       net config peer


   b.  To change your comment to "This is Becky's workstation," type

       net config peer /srvcomment:"This is Becky's workstation"



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Making permanent changes to the   Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"
 configuration

 Changing settings when starting   Net Start Peer
 the Peer service

 Using the Peer service            Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
                                   for MSOS/2


 Net Config Server
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net config server command displays or changes settings for the Server
 service while it is running.


 Syntax

 net config server [options]

 where

 options are the following:

     /accessalert:n
       Sets the number of permission violations that trigger an alert
       message. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5 permission violations.

     /alertnames:name[,...]
       Specifies usernames and computernames to receive administrative alert
       messages (such as a printer problem or full disk). Separate multiple
       name entries with a comma.

     /alertsched:time
       Sets how often (in minutes) the server checks for alert conditions.
       The range is 0-65535; the default is 5 minutes.

     /autodisconnect:time
       Sets the maximum number of minutes a user's session can be inactive
       before it is disconnected. (This option is available only to a server
       with an Unlimited User Pak.) You can specify -1 to never disconnect.
       The range is -1-65535; the default is -1.

     /diskalert:n
       Sets a minimum number for kilobytes of available disk space. When
       available disk space is less than the specified amount, an alert
       message is generated. The range is 0-65535; the default is 300
       kilobytes.

     /erroralert:n
       Sets the number of errors that trigger an alert message. The range is
       0-65535; the default is 5 errors.

     /logonalert:n
       Sets the number of logon violations that trigger an alert message. The
       range is 0-65535; the default is 5 logon violations.

     /maxauditlog:kilobytes
       Sets the maximum number of kilobytes for the server's audit trail,
       NET.AUD. The range is 0-65535; the default is 100 kilobytes.

     /netioalert:n
       Sets the number of network input-output (I/O) errors that trigger an
       alert message. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5 I/O errors.

     /srvcomment:"text"
       Adds a comment for the server that is displayed in LAN Manager Screens
       and with the net view command. The comment can have as many as 48
       characters. Enclose the text in quotation marks.

     /srvhidden:{yes | no}
       Specifies whether the server's computername appears on display
       listings of servers. The default is no.

 To display the current configuration for the Server service, type net config
 server without options.


 Comments

 Use the net config server command to temporarily change configurable Server
 service options that don't require stopping and restarting the service. If
 you want the change to be permanent, use an editor or the Setup program to
 change the value for the corresponding LANMAN.INI entry. For the change to
 take effect, stop and restart the service.

 Not all Server service options can be changed using the net config server
 command; however, the net config server display includes additional
 information from the [server] section of the LANMAN.INI file (or net start
 server) settings. The display includes the following information about the
 server:


   ş   The server's computername, a descriptive comment, and the software
       version

   ş   The server's Additional User Paks (number of users allowed)

   ş   The network description

   ş   The events that produce administrative alerts, and who receives them

   ş   The type of security the server is using

   ş   The audit setting

   ş   The file and memory allocations for the server

   ş   The maximum number of users who can use the server's shared resources

   ş   The maximum number of resources the server can share

   ş   The maximum number of server files that can be open

   ş   The location of the LANMAN directory



 Examples


   a.  To display information about the local server, and prevent the display
       from scrolling, type

       net config server | more


   b.  To remove a server's computername from the list of available servers
       and have only the username benp receive alert messages, type

       net config server /srvhidden:yes /alertnames:benp



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Making permanent changes to the   Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"
 configuration

 Starting and configuring a        Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 server                            Guide, Chapter 2

 Configuring settings when         Net Start Server
 starting the Server service


 Net Config Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net config workstation command displays or changes settings for the
 Workstation service while it is running.


 Syntax

 net config workstation [options]

 where

 options are the following:

     /charcount:bytes
       Sets the amount of data LAN Manager collects before sending the data
       to a communication device. If /chartime:msec is also set, LAN Manager
       acts on whichever option is satisfied first. The range is 0-65535; the
       default is 16 bytes.

     /chartime:msec
       Sets the number of milliseconds LAN Manager collects data before
       sending the data to a communication device. If /charcount:bytes is
       also set, LAN Manager acts on whichever option is satisfied first. The
       range is 0-65535000; the default is 250 milliseconds.

     /charwait:sec
       Sets the number of seconds LAN Manager waits for a communication
       device to become available. The range is 0-65535; the default is 3600
       seconds.

     /maxerrorlog:kbytes
       Sets the maximum number of kilobytes for the error log file. The range
       is 2 to total disk size; the default is 100 kilobytes.

     /othdomains:names
       Lists the other domains from which the workstation receives messages
       (up to four, separated by commas). Servers in the other domains appear
       in lists that are viewed at the workstation.

     /printbuftime:sec
       Sets the number of seconds the prn: print device is kept open (for
       compatibility-mode print requests). Most applications that use MS OS/2
       compatibility mode do not explicitly close the prn: print device to
       tell MS OS/2 to send the contents of the print buffer to the printer.
       The range is 0-65535; the default is 90 seconds.

 To display the current configuration for the Workstation service, type net
 config workstation without options.


 Comments

 Use the net config workstation command to temporarily change configurable
 Workstation service options that don't require stopping and restarting the
 service. If you want the change to be permanent, use an editor or the Setup
 program to change the value for the corresponding LANMAN.INI entry. For the
 change to take effect, stop and restart the service.

 Changing the /printbuftime option can expedite printing through MS-DOS
 applications in the MS OS/2 compatibility mode. This option sets the amount
 of time LAN Manager waits to close a print device. If print jobs are not
 processed quickly, the value of this option could be too high.

 Not all Workstation service options can be changed using the net config
 workstation command. For additional options, see Net Start Workstation.


 Examples


   a.  To display the current configuration for the Workstation service, type

       net config workstation


   b.  To change the maximum error log size to 200 kilobytes, type

       net config workstation /maxerrorlog:200



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Making permanenent changes to     Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"
 the configuration

 Starting and configuring a        Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
 workstation

 Configuring settings when         Net Start Workstation
 starting the Workstation service


 Net Console
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net console command starts the console version of the LAN Manager
 Screen.


 Syntax

 net console [password | *] [/mono]

 where

 password
   Is a password that you choose when starting the console version of the LAN
   Manager Screen. The password must be provided to exit the screen. To
   bypass a prompt for an exit password, supply the exit password with the
   command.

 *
   Produces a prompt for the password. The password will not be displayed
   when you type it.

 /mono
   Improves the LAN Manager Screen display for some computer screens. Try the
   command with and without /mono to determine which display you prefer.

 To display the console version of the LAN Manager Screen, type net console
 without options.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The console version of the LAN Manager Screen is not available for
 workstations running the Peer service.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Comments

 Use the net console command to display the console version of the LAN
 Manager Screen, which is similar to the following:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book.)

 Use the console version of the LAN Manager Screen for servers that are
 publicly accessible but need some security measures. This version lets users
 work directly at a server to view the contents of queues, delete their own
 queued requests, and send messages.

 Users can neither remove the screen nor perform administrative tasks unless
 they know the exit password supplied when the console version of the screen
 was started. However, if the exit password is not supplied when the console
 version of the screen is started, any user is able to remove the screen and
 perform administrative tasks that are available at the server.

 When the console version of the LAN Manager Screen is displayed, pressing
 ALT+ESC or CTRL+ESC to start another MS OS/2 or MS-DOS session causes an
 error message to appear. Press ENTER to remove the error message. You must
 exit the console version of the LAN Manager Screen to return to the MS OS/2
 prompt.


 Example

 To start the console version of the LAN Manager Screen, type

   net console

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Using the console version of the  Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 LAN Manager Screen                Guide, Chapter 11

 Displaying other LAN Manager      Net and Net Admin
 screens


 Net Continue
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net continue command reactivates suspended services or shared printers.



 Syntax

 net continue service

 net continue print[=devicename]

 where

 service
   Is netlogon, netrun, peer, server, or workstation.

 print[=devicename]
   Reactivates a shared printer. Omitting =devicename continues jobs on all
   printers.


 Comments


 At a server and a workstation running the Peer service:

 Use the net continue command to reactivate a service (or printer[s]) that
 has been paused. You should pause a service before stopping the service to
 let users complete jobs or disconnect from resources. To make a minor
 correction to a resource, pausing the service (or printer) might be
 sufficient. Then use the net continue command to reactivate the service (or
 printer), without canceling users' connections.


 At a workstation:

 Use the net pause and net continue commands to switch between network
 printers and a printer attached to your computer.

 For example, if you are using LPT1: for a network connection and you also
 have a printer attached to your computer's LPT1 port, only the network
 connection is recognized. To send a print job to the printer attached to
 your computer, use the net pause workstation command to suspend the network
 connection without logging off from the network. To restore the network
 connection, use net continue workstation.


 Example

 To reactivate a printer connected to the server's LPT1 port, type

   net continue print=lpt1:

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Controlling services              Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 2

 Pausing a service                 Net Pause

 Stopping and starting services    Net Start and Net Stop


 Net Copy
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net copy command copies files from a source to a destination.


 Syntax

 net copy source[+source[+...]] [/a | /b] [destination [/a | /b] [/v]]

 net copy /to:username [/password:{password | *}] source [destination]

 net copy /from:username [/password:{password | *}] source [destination]

 where

 source
   Specifies the file(s) being copied. The source can be a file, a directory,
   or a devicename. Specify multiple files by using MS OS/2 wildcard
   characters. Separate multiple filenames with a plus sign (+).

 destination
   Specifies where source will be copied to. The destination can be a file, a
   directory, or a devicename. You can also specify multiple filenames by
   using MS OS/2 wildcard characters.

 /a
   Treats source or destination as ASCII text.

 /b
   Treats source or destination as a binary file.

 /v
   Verifies that information was properly recorded on the destination disk.

 /to:username
   Copies from the local server to a user in the logon domain at a remote
   server.

 /password:{password | *}
   Provides the password (if required) for access to the shared resources of
   the remote server. An asterisk (*) produces a prompt for the password. The
   password will not be displayed when you type it.

 /from:username
   Copies from a user's server in the logon domain to the local server.


 Comments

 Use the net copy command in much the same way as you would use the MS OS/2
 copy command. The net copy command, however, is much faster for copying
 between directories on a remote server. You don't need to connect to shared
 directories to use the net copy command. LAN Manager makes the necessary
 connections.

 The net copy command is usually used to copy files, but source can also be a
 directory (to copy all files in the directory) or a devicename (such as C:
 to copy all files in the current directory of drive C), or the MS OS/2 con
 command (to copy what is typed at the keyboard). Also, destination can be a
 devicename (such as LPT1: to copy to the device connected to the LPT1 port).


 If source is a file (without a path), LAN Manager assumes the file to be in
 the current directory on the current drive.

 If destination is an existing file, LAN Manager overwrites it. If
 destination is a file that does not already exist, LAN Manager creates a new
 file. The new file is given the same name, creation date, and creation time
 as the source file.

 If only a drive is specified as the destination, LAN Manager copies to the
 current directory on that drive. If no drive is specified, the source is
 copied to the current drive.

 The /to and /from options offer a simple way to copy between servers. The
 remote server must have a PUBLIC shared directory to or from which the copy
 is made, and you must have read and write permissions for the remote
 directory.

 The user at the remote server must be validated at logon in your logon
 domain. If the user is logged on at more than one server in the domain, the
 copy is made to or from the first server that LAN Manager finds.


 Using the /a or /b option:

 The /a or /b option performs differently depending on whether it follows
 source or destination. The /a option is in effect in both cases until the /b
 option is specified.

 The /a option copies the file as ASCII text:


   ş   Placed after source, it causes the copying to stop before the first
       end-of-file character

   ş   Placed after destination, it causes an end-of-file character to be
       added as the last character of the new file


 The /b option copies the file in binary format:


   ş   Placed after source, it copies all end-of-file characters

   ş   Placed after destination, it copies all but the last end-of-file
       character



 Using the /v option:

 The /v option verifies one by one that the sectors written on the
 destination disk are recorded properly. It also causes the net copy command
 to run slower, because LAN Manager checks each entry recorded on the disk.


 Examples


   a.  To copy the MAIL.DOC file from the LISTS directory on the \\SALES
       server to the ADDRESS directory on the \\SALES server, type

       net copy \\sales\lists\mail.doc \\sales\address


   b.  To send a copy of the STATUS.DOC file from the local REPORTS directory
       to a remote server where the username is susanbr, type

       net copy /to:susanbr \reports\status.doc


   c.  To copy the NAMES.DOC file from the username susanbr's PUBLIC
       directory (protected by the password firefly) and to rename the file
       CONTACTS.DOC at the local server, type

       net copy /from:susanbr /password:firefly names.doc contacts.doc



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Moving files                      Net Move

 Using directories and files       Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide

 MSOS/2 copy command               MSOS/2 manual(s)


 Net Device
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net device command displays information about shared printers and
 communication devices, or controls active print jobs and
 communication-device requests.


 Syntax

 net device [devicename [/delete | /restart]]

 where

 devicename
   Is a printer or communication device.

 /delete
   Cancels the active print job or communication-device request.

 /restart
   Starts printing the current document from the beginning at a spooled
   printer.

 To display the status of all printers and communication devices shared on
 the local server, type net device without options.


 Comments

 Use the net device command to cancel an active print job or
 communication-device request and restart the current spooled print job from
 the beginning. Use the net comm command to cancel all pending
 communication-device requests and the net print command to cancel all but
 the currently printing job at a spooled print device.

 The net device command also produces a display of the shared resource, the
 status of the device, the amount of time the device has been in use by the
 current user, and the username of the current user. The display is similar
 to the following:

   Devicename     Status        Date/Time    Username
   _________________________________________________________
   LPT1 Spooled   Idle          15:46:00

 The status of a device can be


   ş   IdleÄNot in use

   ş   PrintingÄPrinter is active

   ş   OpenÄCommunication device is active

   ş   PausedÄDevice has been paused

   ş   ErrorÄA problem exists with the device

   ş   Out of paperÄThe printer has no paper



 Examples


   a.  To view the status of the printer attached to the LPT1 port on the
       server, type

       net device lpt1:


   b.  To stop the current document from printing on the printer attached to
       the server's LPT2 port, type

       net device lpt2: /delete


   c.  To restart printing a document on the printer attached to the server's
       LPT1 port, type

       net device lpt1: /restart



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up and managing spooled   Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 printer queues                    Guide, Chapter 8

 Setting up and managing           Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 communication-device queues       Guide, Chapter 9

 Other commands that control       Net Comm, Net Print, and Net Share
 devices


 Net Error
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net error command displays or the error log.


 Syntax

 net error [/count:number] [/reverse]

 net error /delete

 where

 /count:number
   Displays the specified number of error messages (beginning with the oldest
   error message).

 /reverse
   Displays error messages in order of newest to oldest. Without this option,
   messages are displayed in order of oldest to newest.

 /delete
   Removes all entries from the error log.

 To display the contents of the error log, type net error without options.

 This command can also be typed net errors.


 Comments

 Use the net error command to display the contents of the error log. To get a
 more detailed explanation for an error message, use the net helpmsg command.
 To get a listing of the most recent messages in the error log, use the
 /count:number and /reverse options together.

 The error message log is stored in the LANMAN\LOGS\NET.ERR file. When the
 error log is full, no new entries are added until the contents of the file
 are removed with the /delete option.

 To change the size of the error log, edit the maxerrorlog entry in the
 [workstation] entry of the LANMAN.INI file, or use the /maxerrorlog option
 of the net config workstation or net start workstation command.


 Examples


   a.  To display the entire error log in chronological order, type

       net error


   b.  To view the five most recent error messages, type

       net error /count:5 /reverse


   c.  To remove all entries from the error log, type

       net error /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Changing the error log size       Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File";
                                   Net Config Workstation and
                                   Net Start Workstation

 Getting help with an error        Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 message                           Guide, Chapter 2; Net Helpmsg


 Net File
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net file command displays the names of all open shared files and the
 number of file locks, if any, on each file. This command also closes shared
 files and removes file locks.


 Syntax

 net file [id [/close]]

 where

 id
   Is the identification number of the file.

 /close
   Closes an open file and releases locked records. Type this command from
   the server where the file is shared.

 To get a list of the open files on a server, type net file without options.


 This command can also be typed net files.


 Comments

 Use the net file command to view and control files shared on the network.
 Shared files are sometimes left open and locked by mistake. The locked
 portions of a file cannot be accessed by other computers on the network. Use
 the net file command's /close option to remove the lock and close the file.


 The display for the net file command is similar to the following:

   File      Path             Username    #locks
   _______________________________________________

   0         C:\A_FILE.TXT    MARYSL      0
   1         C:\DATABASE      DEBBIET     2


 Examples


   a.  To view a display of information about shared files, type

       net file


   b.  To close a file with identification number 1, type

       net file 1 /close



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up and managing disk      Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 resources                         Guide, Chapters 7 and 12

 Running executable shared files   Net Run

 Sharing files                     Net Share


 Net Forward
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net forward command routes incoming messages from one alias to another.



 Syntax

 net forward alias1 alias2

 net forward alias1 /delete

 where

 alias1
   Specifies the alias for which messages are to be forwarded.

 alias2
   Specifies the alias to receive the forwarded messages.

 /delete
   Cancels forwarding for alias1; messages sent to alias1 are received
   locally.

 This command can also be typed net for.


 Comments

 Use the net forward command to send messages received by an alias at a
 workstation to an alias at another workstation. The following rules apply to
 message forwarding:


   ş   You can only forward messages to one alias at a time. To change the
       alias for forwarding, you must use the /delete option to cancel
       forwarding for alias1, then specify a new alias2.

   ş   You can't forward messages that have been forwarded. To stop receiving
       forwarded messages, use the net name command's /delete option. This
       removes the alias from your workstation.

   ş   Forwarded messages are logged at the receiving workstation (if the
       Messenger service is running and message logging is on).

   ş   If the receiving workstation stops, forwarding is canceled.


 The net name command displays the aliases assigned to your workstation, and
 any aliases to or from which messages are being forwarded.


 Examples


   a.  To forward your messages (your alias is billph) to the alias patma,
       type

       net forward billph patma


   b.  To change the forwarding so that your messages go to the user with the
       alias marysl, cancel forwarding to the alias patma by typing

       net forward billph /delete


       Now forward your messages to the new alias by typing

       net forward billph marysl

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Saving your messages              Net Log

 Adding and removing aliases       Net Name

 Sending messages                  Net Send

 Sending, receiving, and logging   Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
 messages




 Net Group
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net group command adds, displays, or modifies groups on servers with
 user-level security.


 Syntax

 net group [groupname [/comment:"text"]]

 net group groupname {/add [/comment:"text"] | /delete}

 net group groupname username[ ...] {/add | /delete}

 where

 groupname
   Is the name of the group. Supply only a groupname to view a list of users
   in a group.

 username[ ...]
   Lists one or more usernames to add to or remove from a group. Separate
   multiple username entries with a space.

 /comment:"text"
   Adds a comment for a new or existing group. The comment can have as many
   as 48 characters. Enclose the text in quotation marks.

 /add
   Adds a group, or adds a username to a group.

 /delete
   Removes a group, or removes a username from a group.

 To display the name of the server and the names of groups on the server,
 type net group without options.

 This command can also be typed net groups.


 Comments

 Use the net group command to group users who use the network in the same or
 similar ways. This is helpful when assigning resource permissions (net
 access). You can assign permissions for a group, and each member of the
 group automatically has these permissions.

 Groups are part of the user accounts database (NET.ACC).

 A display of groups on the server is similar to the following:

   Group Accounts for \\PRODUCTION
   ______________________________________________________________
   *ADMINS                   *GUESTS                   *SERVERS
   *USERS

 Notice that each groupname is preceded by an asterisk (*). This
 distinguishes groups in displays that include both users and groups.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 When you type the net group command at a backup domain controller or a
 member server, changes to the user accounts database are automatically made
 at the primary domain controller and then replicated to backup domain
 controllers and member servers.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Examples


   a.  To display a list of all the groups on the local server, type

       net group


   b.  To add a group called exec to the user accounts database, type

       net group exec /add


   c.  To add the existing user accounts stevev, ralphr, and jennyt to the
       exec group, type

       net group exec stevev ralphr jennyt /add


   d.  To display users in the exec group, type

       net group exec


   e.  To add a comment to the exec group record, type

       net group exec /comment:"The executive staff."



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Assigning resource permissions    Net Access
 to groups

 Managing user accounts            Net User


 Net Help
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net help command provides a list of commands and topics for which you
 can get help, or provides help with a specific command or topic.


 Syntax

 net help [command [/options] | topic]

 net command {/help | /?}

 where

 command
   Is the command you need help with (don't type net as part of command).

 topic
   Is the topic you need help with.

 /options
   Displays the available options of the specified command.

 /help
   Provides an alternate way to display the help text.

 /?
   Displays the correct syntax for the command.

 To display a list of commands and topics for which you can get help, type
 net help without options.


 Examples


   a.  To produce the same information about the net load command using two
       forms of the net help command, type

       net help load


       or

       net load /help

   b.  To view the syntax for the net load command, type

       net load /?


   c.  To view the available options of the net error command, type

       net help error /options


   d.  To view information about the logon utility (and the net logon
       command), type

       net help logon



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Getting help                      Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 2

 Getting help with a LAN Manager   Net Helpmsg
 error message


 Net Helpmsg
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net helpmsg command provides help with a LAN Manager error message.


 Syntax

 net helpmsg message#

 where

 message#
   Is the four-digit number of the LAN Manager message you need help with.


 Comments

 Use the net helpmsg command to get an explanation of why an error occurred
 and information about what action to take to solve the problem.


 Example

 To get help with LAN Manager error message NET2182, type

   net helpmsg 2182

 See Also

 For information about             See Also
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Getting help                      Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 2

 Getting help with LAN Manager     Net Help
 commands


 Net Load
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net load command loads a profile.


 Syntax

 net load [[drive:path] filename]

 where

 drive:path
   Is an absolute path specifying where the profile is stored. Without a
   drive letter and path, LAN Manager assumes the profile is stored in the
   LANMAN\PROFILES directory.

 filename
   Is required to load a profile other than the default profile,
   NETLOGON.PRO. If the file has a .PRO extension, you can type the filename
   without .PRO.

 To load the default profile, LANMAN\PROFILES\NETLOGON.PRO, type net load
 without options.


 Comments


 At a server:

 Use the net load command to load a profile. A profile loads commands that
 share and configure server resources, and make connections to network
 resources: net comm, net print, net share, and net use. When you stop the
 Server service and shut down a server, these commands are lost unless you
 save them in a profile. To automatically save and load a server profile, set
 the autoprofile entry in the [server] section of the LANMAN.INI file to
 both, and provide a pathname for autopath ([server] section). The default
 name is SRVAUTO.PRO, which is in the LANMAN\PROFILES directory.

 To view a list of shared resources, use the net share command.


 At a workstation:

 Use the net load command to automatically connect a workstation to shared
 resources. Each time you log on at a workstation, LAN Manager loads the
 default profile file, NETLOGON.PRO. Only net use commands are loaded, even
 if other commands are in the file. The net comm, net print, and net share
 commands are not loaded unless the Server service is running.

 To view a list of connections, use the net use command.


 At both a server and a workstation:

 Loading a profile cancels all existing network connections and share
 definitions. Before loading a new profile, LAN Manager issues a prompt
 telling you how many connections the server or workstation has and
 requesting confirmation to continue.

 To create a profile, use the net save command.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The net load command works the same for a workstation running the Peer
 service as it does for a server.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Examples


   a.  To load the PRINTERS.SP1 profile from the LANMAN directory, type

       net load c:\lanman\printers.sp1


   b.  To load the BUDGET.PRO profile, type

       net load budget


   c.  To restore connections made with NETLOGON.PRO, type

       net load


       LAN Manager reminds you of the existing connections and asks if you
       want them canceled. Type Y to load NETLOGON.PRO.

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Automatically loading a server    Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"
 profile

 Setting up and managing shared    Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 resources                         Guide, Part 3

 Saving and loading server         Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 profiles                          Guide, Chapter 10

 Saving profiles                   Net Save

 Saving and loading workstation    Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
 profiles




 Net Log
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net log command controls or displays information about message logging.



 Syntax

 net log [[drive:path] filename | devicename] [/on | /off]

 where

 drive:path
   Specifies where the message log is stored. Without a drive letter and
   path, LAN Manager assumes the log is stored in the LANMAN\LOGS directory.

 filename
   Is the name of the message log. You can type only the name if the filename
   has a .LOG extension. By default, messages are stored in MESSAGES.LOG.

 devicename
   Is the name of a device at your computer connected to a printer. This name
   can be an LPT devicename (for parallel printers) or a COM devicename (for
   serial printers). Messages are printed as they're received.

 /on
   Restarts message logging.

 /off
   Stops message logging.

 To display the current status for message logging and the name of the
 message log, type net log without options.


 Comments

 Use the net log command to stop and start message logging, change the name
 of the file that stores the messages, or have messages printed as they're
 received. Message logging is on by default when the Messenger service is
 started.

 You can read the message log with the type command. To view logged messages
 on the LAN Manager Screen, from the Message menu, choose Read message log
 file.

 You can stop message logging with the /off option and still view messages if
 the Netpopup service is running. However, if the Netpopup service is
 stopped, and message logging is off, your workstation will emit a beep when
 a message is received, but will neither display nor log the message.

 To change the default message log file pathname, use a text editor or the
 Setup program to change the logfile entry in the [messenger] section of the
 LANMAN.INI file, or supply a pathname using the /logfile option of the net
 start messenger command.


 Examples


   a.  To see if message logging is on and the message log filename, type

       net log


   b.  To change the name of the message log from MESSAGES.LOG to
       NOVEMBER.LOG, type

       net log november


   c.  To print messages directly to the printer connected to the LPT1 port,
       type

       net log lpt1:



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Starting the Messenger service    Net Start Messenger

 Starting the Netpopup service     Net Start Netpopup

 Logging messages                  Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide


 Net Logoff
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net logoff command logs a username off from the network.


 Syntax

 net logoff


 Comments

 Use the net logoff command to remove a username and password from a
 workstation.

 Logging off does not stop services that are running. It simply ensures that
 no one can use your username and password to gain access to shared
 resources, because logging off cancels all connections to shared resources.


 You cannot log off if you are using a connection to a shared directory as
 your current drive. You must change to a local drive on your computer before
 using net logoff.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Logging on at a 386 server with   Chapter 3, "LAN Manager Utilities,"
 local security                    Logon

 Logging off from a 386 server     Chapter 3, "LAN Manager Utilities,"
 with local security               Logoff


 Net Logon
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net logon command logs a username on to the network.


 Syntax

 net logon [username [password | *]] [/domain:name]

 where

 username
   Is the name by which you are identified on the network (username can have
   as many as 20 characters).

 password
   Is the user's password.

 *
   Produces a prompt for the password. The password will not be displayed
   when you type it.

 /domain:name
   Is the name of a domain (other than your workstation domain) in which you
   want to log on. This is called the logon domain.

 To get prompts requesting your username and password, type net logon without
 options.


 Comments

 Use the net logon command to establish your username and password at a
 workstation. These are used to log you on to the network and verify that you
 can use network resources. Only one username can be logged on at a
 workstation.

 If you don't specify a username with net logon, the default username from
 the username entry in the [netshell] section of the LANMAN.INI file is
 displayed with the prompt. If this entry is blank, the computername from the
 computername entry in the [workstation] section of the LANMAN.INI file is
 displayed.


 Examples


   a.  To log on to the network and have LAN Manager prompt for your username
       and password, type

       net logon


   b.  To log on to the network in the accounting domain with the username
       felix and the password freddy, type

       net logon felix freddy /domain:accounting



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Logging off                       Net Logoff

 Changing your password            Net Password

 Logging on to and off from the    Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
 network


 Net Move
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net move command moves file(s) from a source to a destination.


 Syntax

 net move source [destination]

 where

 source
   Is the pathname of the file(s) being moved. Specify multiple files by
   using MS OS/2 wildcard characters.

 destination
   Is the pathname to which source is moved. If more than one file is moved,
   destination must be a directory. If destination is omitted, files are
   moved to the current directory. LAN Manager won't overwrite an existing
   file during a move. If destination is an existing file, the move is
   canceled.


 Comments

 Use the net move command to move a file(s) between any two directories on
 the network.

 Moving a file is different from copying a file. Moving relocates the file;
 copying makes a duplicate. The moved file is given the creation date and
 time of when the move occurred.


 Example

 To move all the files in the TEXT directory of your C drive to the BUDGET
 directory on the \\ADMIN server's REPORTS shared directory, type

   net move c:\text\*.* \\admin\reports\budget

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Copying files                     Net Copy


 Net Name
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net name command adds or deletes an alias, or displays a list of
 aliases.


 Syntax

 net name [alias [/add | /delete]]

 where

 alias
   Is a name to receive messages. The alias can have as many as 15
   characters.

 /add
   Adds an alias. Typing /add is optional; typing net name alias works the
   same way.

 /delete
   Removes an alias.

 To display a list of aliases currently in use, type net name without
 options.


 Comments

 Use the net name command to specify aliases for receiving messages.

 The three kinds of aliases are


   ş   A computername, which is added as an alias with net start workstation
       when the Workstation service is started. The alias cannot be deleted.

   ş   A username, which is added as an alias with net logon when you log on,
       provided it is not in use elsewhere on the network.

   ş   Aliases for messaging, which are added with net name or forwarded from
       another computer with net forward.


 Each alias on your workstation will receive messages.


 Examples


   a.  To add the alias juliewo, type

       net name juliewo


   b.  To stop receiving forwarded messages for the alias lisar, type

       net name lisar /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Saving messages                   Net Log

 Sending messages                  Net Send; Microsoft LAN Manager User's
                                   Guide


 Net Password
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net password command changes the password for a user account on a server
 or in a domain.


 Syntax

   net password [[\\computername | /domain:name]
   username oldpassword
   {newpassword | *}]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the server at which the password will be changed.

 username
   Is your username.

 oldpassword
   Is your current password.

 newpassword
   Is the new password, which can have as many as 14 characters.

 *
   Produces a prompt for the new password, which can have as many as 14
   characters. The password will not be displayed when you type it.

 /domain:name
   Is the domain in which the password will be changed. Specifying the
   /domain option with no value changes the password in the workstation
   domain.

 To get prompts for the name of the domain or server, the username, the old
 password, and the new password, type net password without options.


 Comments

 Use the net password command to change your password. If you don't supply a
 \\computername or a /domain:name, LAN Manager assumes you are changing the
 password of your account in the workstation domain.


 Examples


   a.  To change your password for the \\PRODUCTION server from passwd to
       hctrebor (your username is robertch), type

       net password \\production robertch passwd hctrebor


       To make the same change, but have LAN Manager issues a prompt for a
       new password that won't be displayed as you enter it, type

       net password \\production robertch passwd *

   b.  To change your password in your workstation domain from passwd to
       hctrebor, type

       net password robertch passwd hctrebor


   c.  To change the password for your user account in the accounting domain
       from robertcx to hctrebor, type

       net password /domain:accounting robertch robertcx hctrebor



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Specifying a logon password       Net Logon

 Changing passwords                Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide


 Net Pause
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net pause command pauses services or shared printers.


 Syntax

 net pause service

 net pause print[=devicename]

 where

 service
   Is netlogon, netrun, peer, server, or workstation.

 print[=devicename]
   Pauses a shared printer. Omitting =devicename pauses all jobs on all
   shared printers. Include a devicename (such as LPT1) to pause the
   connection to a particular network printer.


 Comments


 At a server:

 Use the net pause command before stopping a service to let users complete
 jobs or disconnect from resources. Pausing a service puts it on hold but
 doesn't remove the software from memory. Users who already have a connection
 to the server's resources are able to finish their tasks, but new
 connections to the resources are prevented.

 If you plan to stop a service that affects the server's shared resources,
 first pause the service. Then broadcast a message that the service will be
 stopped (use the net send command). When an adequate amount of time has
 passed to give people time to finish using the server's resources, stop the
 service (use the net stop command).

 To reactivate a service or printer, use the net continue command.


 At a workstation:

 Use the net pause and net continue commands to switch between network
 printers and printers attached to your computer.

 For example, if you are using LPT1: for a network connection, and you also
 have a printer attached to your computer's LPT1 port, only the network
 connection is recognized. To send a print job to the printer attached to
 your computer, use the net pause workstation command to suspend the network
 connection without logging off from the network. To restore network access,
 use the net continue workstation command.


 At both a server and a workstation:

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Not all services can be paused. For example, stopping the Messenger service
 only prevents the workstation from sending and receiving messages, but does
 not affect other users. Therefore, pausing and stopping have the same
 effect.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Pausing affects the following services:


   ş   Pausing the Netlogon service prevents the server from processing logon
       requests at that server. If the domain has other logon servers, users
       can still log on to the network.

   ş   Pausing the Netrun service prevents users from running a program at
       that server. Programs currently running on the server are not
       affected.

   ş   Pausing the Server service prevents users from making new connections
       to the server's shared resources and, if there are no other logon
       servers on the network, from logging on to the network. An existing
       connection is unaffected. Administrators can make connections to the
       server even if it is paused.

   ş   Pausing the Workstation service keeps the username, password, and
       connections defined, but directs requests for print devices to
       printers attached to the computer rather than the network connections.


   ş   Pausing the Peer service prevents users from making new connections to
       shared resources.



 Examples


   a.  To pause all the shared printers at a server, type

       net pause print


   b.  To prevent new uses of shared programs, pause the Netrun service by
       typing

       net pause netrun


   c.  To pause the Server service, type

       net pause server



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Controlling services              Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 2

 Continuing a paused resource      Net Continue

 Starting services                 Net Start service

 Stopping services                 Net Stop

 Making network connections        Net Use


 Net Print
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net print command displays or controls print jobs and printer queues, or
 sets or modifies options for a printer queue.


 Syntax


 For a server:

 net print

   net print sharename [/priority:number]
   [/route:devicename[,...]] [/after:time]
    [/until:time] [/driver:filename] [/separator:pathname]
   [/processor:pmname]
    [/remark:"text"] [/options]

 net print sharename [/hold | /release | /delete | /purge]

 net print job# [/hold | /release | /first | /last | /delete]


 For a workstation:

 net print {\\computername[\sharename] | devicename}

 net print {\\computername | devicename} [job# [/hold | /release | /delete]]


 where

 sharename
   Is the name of the printer queue. For a workstation, when including the
   sharename with the computername, use a backslash (\) to separate the
   names.

 job#
   Is the identification number assigned to a print job in a printer queue. A
   server with one or more printer queues assigns each print job a unique
   number. If a job number is being used in one printer queue shared by a
   server, that number is not assigned to any other job, not even to jobs in
   other printer queues on that server.

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server sharing the printer queue(s).

 devicename
   Is the name of the device at your computer assigned to the printer queue.
   Devicenames LPT1: through LPT9: are available.

 /priority:number
   Sets the priority for the printer queue (1 is the highest and 9 the
   lowest). Each print job is assigned a priority based on the printer queue
   priority. If a printer has more than one printer queue routed to it, it
   prints jobs from the printer queue with highest priority first.

 /route:devicename
   Routes the printer queue's print jobs to one or more printers. These can
   be local or remote. If print jobs are routed to a remote printer, the
   remote printer must be shared as a (unspooled) communication-device queue
   (see Net Comm). Separate multiple devicename entries with a comma or a
   semicolon (;).

 /after:time
   Prints jobs from the printer queue after the specified time (use 24-hour
   time with the format hh:mm; or use 12-hour time with the format hh:mmam or
   hh:mmpm).

 /until:time
   Prints jobs from the printer queue until the specified time (use 24-hour
   time with the format hh:mm; or use 12-hour time with the format hh:mmam or
   hh:mmpm).

 /driver:filename
   Sets a Presentation Manager print-driver file.

 /separator:pathname
   Instructs the printers in the printer queue to use the separator page in
   the file specified by pathname. The pathname is relative to the MS OS/2
   spool directory (SPOOL), or an absolute pathname. You can choose the
   built-in separator page by entering DEFAULT.SEP.

 /processor:pmname
   Specifies a file. The Presentation Manager Print Manager (spooler)
   maintains the path to this file. Specify only the pure filename. For
   example, if you specify PMPRINT, the spooler looks in the directory
   determined with the Presentation Manager Control PanelÄfor PMPRINT, the
   complete pathname would be C:\OS2\DLL\PMPRINT.QPR.

 /remark:"text"
   Adds a descriptive comment about the printer queue. Enclose the text in
   quotation marks.

 /options
   Displays the options assigned to the printer queue.

 /hold
   When used with job#, holds a print job waiting in the printer queue. The
   print job stays in the printer queue, and other print jobs bypass it until
   it is released. When used with sharename, the printer queue stops printing
   until released. At a workstation, users can hold their own print jobs.

 /release
   Releases a print job or printer queue that has been held. At a
   workstation, users can release their own print jobs.

 /delete
   When used with job#, removes the print job from a printer queue. When used
   with sharename, removes a printer queue. At a workstation, users can
   delete their own print jobs.

 /purge
   Removes all print jobs from the printer queue except the print job that is
   currently printing.

 /first
   Moves a print job to the first position in the printer queue.

 /last
   Moves a print job to the last position in the printer queue.

 To display information about printer queues on the server, type net print
 without options.


 Comments


 At a server:

 Use the net print command to control printer queues and set options such as
 separator pages, print processors, and time limits. To share a printer
 queue, use the net share command. To display or control the status of a
 particular printer, use the net device command.

 The net print command displays information about printer queues in several
 ways.

 Use the form net print to display all of the printer queues on the local
 server. You can limit the display to a particular queue by using the form
 net print sharename or to a particular device by using the form net print
 devicename. The following is a sample display of all printer queues:

   Printer queues at \\PRODUCTION

   Name              Job #      Size         Status
   _________________________________________________________
   LASER Queue       1 jobs               *Queue Active*
        JOHNSW           84        0        Spooling

   LASER2 Queue      1 jobs               *Queue Active*
        MARYSL           75        0        Spooling

   POOL Queue        1 jobs               *Queue Active
        ROBERTCH         45    129844       Printing on LPT2

 Use the form net print sharename /options to display options for a single
 printer queue. A display similar to the following appears:

   Printing options for LASER1

   Status              Queue Active
   Remark
   Print Devices       LPT1
   Driver              POSTSCRPT
   Separator file
   Priority            0
   Print after         12:00am
   Print until         12:00am
   Print processor     PMPRINT
   Parameters

 Use the form net print job# to display a single print job. A display similar
 to the following appears:

   Job ID           35
   Status           Waiting
   Size             3096
   Remark
   Submitting user  MARYSL
   Notify           MARYSL
   Job data type
   Job parameters
   Additional info


 At a workstation:

 Use the net print command to display printer queues and to control your own
 print jobs.

 To display a printer queue on a server, use the form

 net print \\computername\sharename

 To display information about a particular print job on a remote server, use
 the form

 net print \\computername job#

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 To send a print job to a printer queue, connect to the printer queue with
 the net use command and either submit the print job through an application
 program such as a word processor, or send the print job to a printer queue
 with the net copy command.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Examples


   a.  To display print options for the LASER1 queue, type

       net print laser1 /options


   b.  To list printer queues at the local server, type

       net print


   c.  To get information about job number 35 on the \\PRODUCTION server,
       type

       net print \\production 35


   d.  To make job number 263 the last to print, type

       net print 263 /last


   e.  To hold job number 263, type

       net print 263 /hold


   f.  To release job number 263, type

       net print 263 /release


   g.  To set up a printer queue named DEPTLASER that will print from 7:00
       A.M. until 6:00 P.M. (this example uses 24-hour time), type

       net print deptlaser /after:07:00 /until:18:00


   h.  To list the contents of the DOTMATRIX printer queue on the
       \\PRODUCTION server, type

       net print \\production\dotmatrix



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Configuring and sharing printer   Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 queues and customizing separator  Guide, Chapter 8
 pages

 Using the MSOS/2 Print Manager    Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 8; MSOS/2 manual(s)

 Controlling queued devices        Net Device

 Sharing printer queues            Net Share

 Using printer queues              Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide


 Net Run
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net run command runs a program on a server.


 Syntax

 net run command

 where

 command
   Is the command string of the program you want to run. The program file
   must have a .EXE extension. You don't need to supply the filename
   extension.


 Comments

 Use the net run command to run a program on another computer's processor.
 You can do this only from the command line. There is no comparable command
 available through the LAN Manager Screen. The remote computer must be
 running the Netrun service.

 To use this command, follow these steps:


   1.  Connect to a shared directory on the server with the net use command.

   2.  Change your current directory to the shared directory.

   3.  Type net run followed by the filename of the program and any options
       or variables the program requires.


 When you use net run, the program output is sent to your screen unless you
 use the operating system redirection symbol to send information to a file.
 To send information to a file, include >pathname in the net run command
 line.

 If the program being run has options or variables that include filenames,
 specify the full pathname for each file. If a drive letter is included in
 the pathname, LAN Manager assumes it's one of the server's drives.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The net run command cannot be used to run interactive programs such as word
 processors or spreadsheets.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Example

 Suppose you want to run a file-comparison program with the command name
 DIFF.EXE on the \\ADMIN server with the LISTS shared directory. The two
 files you want to compare are MAILLIST.TXT and ADDRESS.LST, and the file you
 want to receive the output is NEWLIST.TXT on your C drive.

 To accomplish this, assign a local drive to the LISTS directory on the
 \\ADMIN server. Change to that drive, and start the program using the net
 run command. Do this by typing

   net use d: \\admin\lists
   d:
   net run diff maillist.txt address.lst > c:\newlist.txt

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Sharing processing power          Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 12

 Connecting to a shared directory  Net Use

 Viewing a list of shared          Net View
 directories


 Net Save
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net save command saves a profile.


 Syntax

 net save [[drive:path] filename]

 where

 drive:path
   Is an absolute path specifying where the profile is to be stored. Without
   a drive letter and path, LAN Manager stores the profile in the
   LANMAN\PROFILES directory.

 filename
   Is required to save a profile to a filename other than the default
   filename NETLOGON.PRO. If the file has a .PRO extension, you can type the
   filename without .PRO.

 To save only net use commands in the default profile, NETLOGON.PRO, type net
 save without options.


 Comments


 At a server:

 Use the net save command to save commands that share and configure server
 resources, and make connections to network resources: net comm, net print,
 net share, and net use. When you stop the Server service and shut down a
 server, these commands are lost unless you save them in a profile. To
 automatically save and load a server profile, set the autoprofile entry in
 the [server] section of the LANMAN.INI file to both, and provide a pathname
 for autopath ([server] section). The default name is SRVAUTO.PRO, which is
 in the LANMAN\PROFILES directory.

 To view a list of shared resources, use the net share command.


 At a workstation:

 Use the net save command to save connections to network resources.
 Connections saved in the NETLOGON.PRO file are loaded automatically at
 logon.

 To view a list of connections, use the net use command.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The net save command works the same for a workstation running the Peer
 service as it does for a server.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Example

 To save shared resource commands in the SRVAUTO.PRO profile, type

   net save srvauto

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Using the LANMAN.INI file         Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"

 Setting up and managing shared    Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 resources                         Guide, Part 3

 Saving and loading server         Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 profiles                          Guide, Chapter 10

 Commands saved in profiles        Net Comm, Net Print, Net Share, and Net
                                   Use

 Loading a profile                 Net Load

 Saving and loading workstation    Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
 profiles


 Net Send
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net send command sends messages or files to other computers or users on
 the network.


 Syntax

 net send {alias | * | /domain[:name] | /broadcast | /users} message

 where

 alias
   Is the username, computername, or other alias to send the message to.

 message
   Is text to be sent as a message, or the complete pathname of a text file
   (preceded by <) to be sent as a message.

 *
   Sends the message to all aliases in your workstation domain.

 /domain[:name]
   Sends the message to all aliases in the workstation domain. If name is
   specified, the message is sent to all aliases in the specified domain.

 /broadcast
   Sends the message to all aliases on the entire network.

 /users
   Sends the message to all users connected to the server.


 Comments

 Use the net send command to send messages to aliases that are active on the
 network. The Messenger service must be running on the receiving workstation
 to receive the message.

 The limit on the size of a message that a workstation can receive is set
 with the sizmessbuf entry in the [messenger] section of the LANMAN.INI file
 or the /sizmessbuf option of the net start messenger command.

 LAN Manager provides several ways to broadcast a message. You can broadcast
 messages to all aliases in your workstation domain (use * or /domain), a
 different domain (/domain:name), or the entire network (/broadcast).
 Broadcast messages can have as many as 128 characters, and should be
 broadcast with discretion. The /users option lets you send a message to all
 users who have sessions with the server.


 Examples


   a.  To send the message "Meeting changed to 3 p.m. Same place." to the
       alias jackst, type

       net send jackst Meeting changed to 3 p.m. Same place.


       Another way to do this is by typing

       net send jackst
             Meeting changed to 3 p.m.
             Same place.

       To send this message, press CTRL+Z or F6, then ENTER.

   b.  To send a small text file named INVITE.DOC to all aliases in the legal
       domain, type

       net send /domain:legal <invite.doc


   c.  To inform every user on the network that a party is being held in the
       cafeteria, type

       net send /broadcast There's a party in the cafeteria!


   d.  To send a message to all users connected to the server, type

       net send /users This server will shut down in 5 minutes.



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Forwarding messages               Net Forward

 Saving messages                   Net Log

 Adding aliases                    Net Name

 Starting the Messenger service    Net Start Messenger

 Sending messages using the LAN    Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
 Manager Screen





 Net Separator
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net separator command prints or cancels printing of a separator page
 before each print job in a printer queue or on a printer.


 Syntax

 net separator {sharename | devicename} {pathname | /delete}

 where

 sharename
   Is the name of the printer queue to use the separator page.

 devicename
   Is the name of a device connected to a printer queue that is to use the
   separator page. All printer queues using the device will use the separator
   page.

 pathname
   Is a pathname for the file containing the separator page description. LAN
   Manager provides a built-in separator page. To use this built-in separator
   page, type DEFAULT.SEP. The default path recognized by the MS OS/2 Print
   Manager is C:\SPOOL.

 /delete
   Cancels printing of a separator page for the specified printer queues.

 The net separator command can also be typed net sep.


 Comments

 Use the net separator command to assign a separator page to a printer queue
 or a printer. LAN Manager provides a built-in separator page file called
 DEFAULT.SEP. This separator page reports the following information:


   ş   Workstation or server that sent the print job

   ş   File that was printed

   ş   Date and time of the printing


 Use the /separator option of the net print command to assign a separator
 file for a printer queue if you are configuring the queue. The /separator
 option of the net print command and the net separator command perform the
 same function.


 Examples


   a.  To start printing separator pages on the printer queue LASER using the
       BANNER.NET file in the SPOOL directory, type

       net sep laser banner.net


   b.  To use the built-in separator page for the LASER2 queue, type

       net sep laser2 default.sep



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up and managing spooled   Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 printer queues                    Guide, Chapter 8

 Other controls for individual     Net Device
 printers

 Other printer queue options       Net Print

 Creating printer queues           Net Share


 Net Session
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net session command lists or disconnects sessions between a server and
 workstations.


 Syntax

 net session [\\computername] [/delete]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the workstation for which session information is displayed.

 /delete
   Ends the server's session with \\computername, and closes all open files
   for the session. If \\computername is omitted, all sessions for the server
   are canceled.

 To display information about all sessions with the local server, type net
 session without options.

 The net session command can also be typed net sessions or net sess.


 Comments

 Use the net session command to display a list of users accessing a server
 (their computername and username), if they have files open, and how long
 each user's session is idle.

 The display is similar to the following:

   Computer      User name     Client Type  Opens   Idle time
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   \\MARIEL      MARIEL        DOS LM 2.0     1     00:00:13
   \\LYNNC       ADMIN         OS/2 LM 2.0    0     01:05:13

 When a display is for one user's session (\\computername is included with
 the command), the display includes a list of shared resources to which the
 user has connections.

 A session is recorded when a user on a workstation successfully contacts a
 server. A successful session occurs when the two systems are on the same
 network, and the user has a username and password that are accepted by the
 server. A user at a workstation has to have a session with a server before
 being able to use the server's resources, and a session is not established
 until a user at a workstation tries to access a resource. A workstation and
 server have only one session, but they can have many entry points to
 resources (connections).

 To set how long a session can remain idle before being automatically
 disconnected, use the autodisconnect entry in the [server] section of the
 LANMAN.INI file or the /autodisconnect option of the net config server and
 net start server commands. (Only a server with an Unlimited User Pak can
 disconnect an idle session.) An automatic disconnection is transparent to
 the user because LAN Manager automatically reconnects the session when it
 becomes active.

 To end a session with the server, use the /delete option along with
 \\computername.


 Examples


   a.  To display a listing of session information for the local server, type

       net session


   b.  To display session information for the workstation with the
       computername MARIEL, type

       net session \\mariel


   c.  To display session information for the \\PRODUCTION server from the
       local server, type

       net admin \\production /command net session


   d.  To end all sessions between the server and workstations, type

       net session /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Monitoring the server's sessions  Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 using the LAN Manager Screen      Guide, Chapter 16

 Running commands on a different   Net Admin
 server

 Checking the status of sessions   Net Status


 Net Share
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net share command creates, deletes, or displays shared resources.


 Syntax

 net share [{IPC$ | ADMIN$} [password]]

 net share sharename [/print]

   net share sharename=devicename[,...]
   [/comm | /print] [password]
    [/permissions:permissions] [/users:number | /unlimited]
   [/remark:"text"]

   net share sharename=drive:path [password]
   [/permissions:permissions]
    [/users:number | /unlimited] [/remark:"text"]

   net share sharename [/permissions:permissions]
    [/users:number | /unlimited] [/remark:"text"]

 net share {sharename | devicename | drive:path} /delete

 where

 password
   Is used to restrict access to a resource on a server with share-level
   security. Only those who supply the password can gain access.

 sharename
   Is the network name for a shared resource. Use net share with a sharename
   to display information about a resource.

 devicename
   Specifies one or more printers or communication devices shared by
   sharename. Separate multiple devicename entries with a comma.

 drive:path
   Specifies the absolute path of a directory to be shared.

 IPC$
   Shares the named pipes essential for communication between programs for
   remote administration and viewing a server's shared resources. The Netrun
   service requires that IPC$ be shared. With user-level security, IPC$ is
   shared automatically. With share-level security, you must share IPC$.

 ADMIN$
   Is an administrative resource. With user-level security, ADMIN$ is shared
   automatically. With share-level security, you must share ADMIN$. When
   sharing ADMIN$, give it a password, and those who know the password can
   remotely administer the server.

 /print
   Identifies the resource as a printer queue.

 /comm
   Identifies the resource as a communication-device queue (comm queue).

 /permissions:permissions
   Assigns permissions to a resource on a server with share-level security.
   Seven permissions are available: RWCDXAP. (See Net Access for a
   description of permissions.) On a server with user-level security, only P
   permission has an effect. Using the net share command to assign P
   permission to a resource on a server with user-level security makes the
   resource accessible only to administrators.

 /users:number
   Sets the maximum number of users who can simultaneously access a shared
   resource. A LAN Manager server is limited to five users, unless you have
   increased the maximum number of users by applying Additional User Paks.
   For a workstation running the Peer service, this entry cannot be more than
   two (the user at the workstation and one other user).

 /unlimited
   Sets the maximum number of users who can simultaneously access a shared
   resource to five, or the number determined by Additional User Paks. At a
   workstation running the Peer service, use this option only for IPC$.

 /remark:"text"
   Adds a descriptive comment about the resource. Enclose the text in
   quotation marks.

 /delete
   Stops sharing the resource.

 To display information about all resources being shared on the local server,
 type net share without options.


 Comments

 Use the following forms of the net share command to share resources:


   ş   To share an existing directory:

       net share sharename=drive:path

   ş   To create and share a printer queue:

       net share sharename=devicename

       or

       net share sharename=devicename /print

   ş   To create and share a comm queue:

       net share sharename=devicename /comm

       Without the /comm option, LAN Manager assumes a printer queue.

   ş   To share a printer queue without assigning a devicename:

       net share sharename /print

   ş   To share IPC$ or ADMIN$ on a server with share-level security:

       net share IPC$ password

       net share ADMIN$ password

       The server's disk drives are shared automatically on all servers (A$,
       B$, and so on).


 When you display all the shared resources at a server, LAN Manager reports
 the sharename, the devicename(s) or pathname associated with it, and a
 descriptive comment.

 The display is similar to the following:

   Sharename  Resource                      Remark
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   IPC$                                     Remote IPC
   ADMIN$     C:\LANMAN                     Remote Admin
   A$         A:\                           Default Share for Internal
   Use
   B$         B:\                           Default Share for Internal
   Use
   C$         C:\                           Default Share for Internal
   Use
   NETLOGON   C:\LANMAN\REPL\IMPORT\SCRIPTS Logon server share
   PUBLIC     C:\PUBLIC                     Public directory for
 production...
   USERS      C:\LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS   Logon server share
   LASER      LPT1                Spooled   Laser printer Ä production
   dept.
   COMQ       COM1

 When you share resources on a server with share-level security, you also
 assign permissions and a password to the resource. To set passwords and
 permissions for servers with user-level security, use the net access (for
 permissions) and net user (for user's passwords) commands.

 When a server is turned off, the commands to share resources are lost unless
 they are saved in a profile. After sharing resources, use the net save
 command with a filename to save the configuration for the shares. When LAN
 Manager is installed, it comes with a profile for servers: SRVAUTO.PRO. This
 file has one default share, the PUBLIC directory, and is loaded and saved
 automatically when the autoprofile entry in the [server] section of the
 LANMAN.INI file is set to both (the default is load).


 Examples


   a.  To display information about shared resources on the server, type

       net share


   b.  To share the two printers attached to LPT1 and COM1 as the printer
       queue POOL1, type

       net share pool1=lpt1:,com1:


   c.  To create and share a comm queue serviced by the modem attached to
       COM2, type

       net share modem=com2 /comm


   d.  To share a printer queue called PRINTERS, type

       net share printers /print


   e.  To share a server's C:\LETTERS directory with the sharename SECRETARY,
       and include a remark, type

       net share secretary=c:\letters /remark:"For department
             123."


   f.  To stop sharing the LETTERS directory, type

       net share secretary /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Sharing resources                 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Part 3

 Setting permissions for           Net Access
 resources on a server with
 user-level security

 Managing communication devices    Net Comm

 Profiles                          Net Load and Net Save

 Managing printer queues           Net Print


 Net Start
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start command starts a service, or displays a list of started
 services.


 Syntax

 net start [service [options]]

 where

 service
   Includes alerter, messenger, netlogon, netpopup, netrun, peer, remoteboot,
   replicator, server, timesource, ups, and workstation.

 options
   Are specific to each service. For more information, see each Net Start
   service entry.

 To display a list of running services, type net start without options. (If
 no services are started, LAN Manager offers to start the Workstation
 service.)


 Comments

 Use the net start service command to start LAN Manager services. Some
 services must be started before others. For example, the Workstation service
 must be started before any other service. If you type a command that
 requires a service that has not been started, LAN Manager offers to start
 the required service.

 Start services automatically by including commands in batch files such as
 STARTUP.CMD, or modify the wrkservices ([workstation] section) and
 srvservices ([server] section) entries in the LANMAN.INI file to
 automatically start services other than the Workstation service. The
 wrkservices entry specifies which services to start when the Workstation
 service is started. The Messenger, Netpopup, and Server services are
 possible values. The srvservices entry specifies which services to start
 when the Server service is started. The Alerter, Netlogon, Netrun,
 Remoteboot, Replicator, UPS, and Timesource services are possible values.

 Names of services cannot be abbreviated when listed in the wrkservices and
 srvservices entries.

 Only administrators can start services on servers with local security.

 When a service starts, LAN Manager reads the LANMAN.INI file and uses values
 in the file to configure the service. To override values in the LANMAN.INI
 file, specify service options and values from the command line.


 Example

 To list the services that are currently running, type

   net start

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Changing the LANMAN.INI file      Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"

 Starting services using the LAN   Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 Manager Screen                    Guide, Chapter 2


 Net Start Alerter
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start alerter command starts the Alerter service. The Alerter
 service sends alert messages.


 Syntax

 net start alerter [/sizalertbuf:bytes]

 where

 /sizalertbuf:bytes
   Determines the size of the alert-message buffer. The range is 512-16384;
   the default is 3072 bytes.

 To start the Alerter service using the values set in the LANMAN.INI file,
 type net start alerter without options.


 Comments

 Start the Alerter service to send alert messages to usernames specified in
 the LANMAN.INI file's alertnames entry ([server] section) and to users
 connected to the server. Alert messages provide warnings about security and
 access problems, user session problems, shutdown of a server because of
 power loss when the UPS service is available, and printer problems. The
 Alerter service also sends messages to users about conditions of their print
 jobs.

 Events that require an administrator's intervention are sent to the
 usernames specified by the alertnames entry. Events such as "print job
 complete" are sent to the username for the user who submitted the job.

 Alert messages are sent as LAN Manager messages from the server to a user's
 workstation. The Messenger service must be running on the user's workstation
 to receive the alert message.


 Example

 To start the Alerter service, type

   net start alerter

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Assigning users to receive alert  Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File";
 messages                          Net Start Server

 Monitoring the network            Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 16


 Net Start Messenger
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start messenger command starts the Messenger service. The Messenger
 service enables a workstation to receive messages and controls message
 logging.


 Syntax

 net start messenger [/sizmessbuf:bytes] [/logfile:pathname]

 where

 /sizmessbuf:bytes
   Sets the number of bytes for the message buffer, defining the size of
   messages the workstation can receive. The range is 512-62000; the default
   is 4096 bytes.

 /logfile:pathname
   Assigns a pathname for the message log. The default is MESSAGES.LOG. This
   file is in the LANMAN\LOGS directory.

 To start the Messenger service using the values set in the LANMAN.INI file,
 type net start messenger without options.


 Comments

 Start the Messenger service so a workstation can receive and log messages. A
 message is sent to a workstation using the alias(es) assigned to the
 workstation as identification.

 A workstation receives messages in two ways:


   ş   A message box displays the message on the workstation's screen if the
       Netpopup service is also running.

   ş   The incoming message is sent to a message log if message logging is
       on. The net log command controls message logging.

       NOTE  In addition to the options listed here, net start messenger
       accepts all net start workstation options when you're starting both
       the Messenger and Workstation services with one command. See Net Start
       Workstation for a listing of these options.


 If you're accustomed to using Microsoft Networks for MS-DOS version 1.0 or
 IBM(R) PC-LAN version 1.2, you can use /mbi:bytes instead of
 /sizmessbuf:bytes.


 Example

 To start the Messenger service and change the message buffer size to 5
 kilobytes (5120 bytes), type

   net start messenger /sizmessbuf:5120

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Controlling network services      Net Continue, Net Pause, and Net Stop

 Forwarding messages               Net Forward

 Logging messages                  Net Log

 Adding aliases                    Net Name

 Sending messages                  Net Send; Microsoft LAN Manager User's
                                   Guide

 Starting the Netpopup service     Net Start Netpopup

 Starting the Workstation service  Net Start Workstation


 Net Start Netlogon
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start netlogon command starts the Netlogon service. The Netlogon
 service verifies logon requests and controls replication of the domainwide
 user accounts database.


 Syntax

   net start netlogon [/pulse:time] [/randomize:time][/update:{yes
   | no}] [/scripts:pathname]

 where

 /pulse:time
   Specifies how many seconds a primary domain controller waits before
   sending each update notice to backup domain controllers and member
   servers. Pulses are not sent while the user accounts database is being
   updated. The range is 60-3600; the default is 300 seconds.

 /randomize:time
   Specifies a value, in seconds, that is sent with each update notice. The
   backup domain controllers and member servers each use this value to
   generate a random number between 0 and the value of /randomize. The backup
   domain controllers and member servers in the domain then request an update
   of the user accounts database at a time specified by their random number
   of seconds. The range is 5-120; the default is 30 seconds.

 /update:{yes | no}
   Set to yes, causes the server's user accounts database to be immediately
   updated by the primary domain controller as soon as the Netlogon service
   starts. This option doesn't affect normal, continuous updating of the
   server's databaseÄit only determines whether an update is performed as
   soon as the Netlogon service starts. This option applies only to backup
   domain controllers and member servers. The default is yes.

 /scripts:pathname
   Sets the pathname where the Netlogon service looks for logon scripts. The
   pathname can be absolute or relative to the LANMAN directory. The /scripts
   option must be present (either on the command line or in the [netlogon]
   section of the LANMAN.INI file) and have a value (for example,
   REPL\IMPORT\SCRIPTS).

 To start the Netlogon service using the values set in the LANMAN.INI file,
 type net start netlogon without options.


 Comments

 Start the Netlogon service on all servers in a domain that use a copy of the
 domain's user accounts database. Options of the Netlogon service control the
 frequency at which the user accounts database is replicated from a primary
 domain controller to backup domain controllers and member servers. (To set
 server roles, use the net accounts command.)

 A domain can have only one primary domain controller, but can have several
 backup domain controllers and member servers. Both the primary domain
 controller and backup domain controllers provide logon validation.

 The Netlogon service verifies logon information as follows:


   ş   If a server is named with the /logonserver option (see Net User),
       logon requests are sent to that server.

   ş   If the server named by the /logonserver option is unavailable, or a
       /logonserver is not named, the logon request goes to the server with
       the lightest work load at the moment.


 Before the Netlogon service can run, several requirements must be met. These
 requirements are as follows:


   ş   Create a user account on the server with the computername of the
       server as the username for the account. Add this account to a group
       called servers.

   ş   If the server is a backup domain controller or member server, create
       the user account on both this server and the primary domain
       controller. On both this server and the primary domain controller, the
       username for the account must be the computername of this server. The
       passwords for the two accounts must be identical, and each account
       must be in the servers group.

   ş   Set the clock on backup domain controllers and member servers to a
       time within 10 minutes of the clock on the primary domain controller.
       You can use the net time command to synchronize clocks if you have
       designated a time source server by running the Timesource service.

   ş   Set the server role, using the net accounts command, to primary,
       backup, or member.

   ş   If you are starting the Netlogon service on a backup domain controller
       or member server for the first time, the primary domain controller
       must be running the Netlogon service.


 When setting up a new domain, set up the primary domain controller first.
 Then, after the Netlogon service is running on the primary domain
 controller, set up any backup domain controllers and member servers in the
 domain.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE
 The LAN Manager 2.0 Netlogon service can provide logon verification for LAN
 Manager 1.x workstations, but the 1.x Netlogon service cannot provide logon
 verification for 2.0 workstations. Mixed versions of the Netlogon service
 cannot run together in the same domain.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 For more information about setting up domains and starting the Netlogon
 service, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.


 Examples


   a.  To start the Netlogon service, type

       net start netlogon


   b.  To start the Netlogon service and temporarily change the value of
       /pulse to 350 seconds, type

       net start netlogon /pulse:350



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up servers with           Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 user-level security and logon     Guide, Chapters 3 and 4
 security

 Setting permissions for user      Net Access
 accounts and groups

 Defining server roles             Net Accounts

 Defining user accounts and        Net User and Net Group
 groups


 Net Start Netpopup
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start netpopup command starts the Netpopup service. The Netpopup
 service causes network messages to display on the computer's screen.


 Syntax

 net start netpopup

 To start the Netpopup service, type net start netpopup.


 Comments

 Start the Netpopup service to display messages on your computer's screen
 when your workstation receives them. The Messenger service must be running
 for the workstation to receive messages.

 A netpopup message looks similar to the following:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book.)

 The message is displayed for one minute. You can remove the message box by
 pressing ESC.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Forwarding messages               Net Forward

 Logging messages                  Net Log

 Starting the Messenger service    Net Start Messenger

 Stopping network services         Net Stop

 Sending and receiving messages    Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide


 Net Start Netrun
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start netrun command starts the Netrun service. The Netrun service
 lets users, from their workstations, run programs on the server's processor.



 Syntax

 net start netrun [/maxruns:number] [/runpath:pathname[;...]]

 where

 /maxruns:number
   Sets the maximum number of net run commands that the server is to handle
   concurrently. The range is 1-10; the default is 3 net run commands.

 /runpath:pathname[;...]
   Sets the search path for programs that network users can run on the
   server's processor using the net run command. Separate multiple pathname
   entries with a semicolon (;). The default is a null (blank) run path.

 To start the Netrun service using the values set in the LANMAN.INI file,
 type net start netrun without options.


 Comments

 Start the Netrun service so users can run programs in the server's run path
 on the server's processor. You do not have to share a directory that
 contains programs to be run; just specify the directory with the /runpath
 option. You can restrict access to all programs by setting permissions for
 PIPE\LANMAN\NETRUN.

 To run a program on the server's processor, a user connects to any shared
 directory on the server, changes to the redirected drive, and uses the net
 run command.

 For servers with share-level security, share IPC$ so users can run programs
 over the network. If the server has user-level security, IPC$ is shared
 automatically.

 For more information about sharing the server's processing power, see the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.


 Example

 To start the Netrun service and allow users to run programs in C:\DBPROG on
 the server's processor, type

   net start netrun /runpath:c:\dbprog

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Sharing processing power          Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 12

 Assigning permissions             Net Access and Net Share

 Commands used to run programs     Net Run and Net Use


 Net Start Peer
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start peer command starts the Peer service. The Peer service enables
 a workstation to perform most server functions.


 Syntax

 net start peer [options]

 where

 options
   are the same as those for net start server with the following exceptions:

     /autodisconnect:time
       Must be set to -1 (never disconnect). Any other setting prevents the
       Peer service from starting.

     /srvhidden:{yes | no}
       Is set to yes as the default, but can be set to no after installation.

     /srvservices:service[ ...]
       At installation you can use the Setup program to include alerter,
       messenger, netpopup, netrun, replicator, and ups. Separate multiple
       service entries with a space.

 To start the Peer service using the values set in the [server] section of
 the LANMAN.INI file, type net start peer without options.


 Comments

 Start the Peer service to enable a workstation to perform the tasks of a
 server with the following exceptions:


   ş   The Peer service does not automatically disconnect users.

   ş   A workstation running the Peer service can share only one
       communication-device queue and one printer queue along with
       directories and files.

   ş   A workstation running the Peer service can support only the owner of
       the workstation and one additional person simultaneously.

   ş   The computername of the workstation running the Peer service does not
       appear in the list of servers for the domain(s) unless you set the
       /srvhidden option to no.

   ş   A workstation running the Peer service cannot use the console version
       of the LAN Manager Screen.

   ş   A resource shared at a workstation running the Peer service cannot
       include the /unlimited option when sharing the resource (see Net
       Share).



 Example

 To start the Peer service and have alert messages sent to johnsw, type

   net start peer /alertnames:johnsw

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Making permanent changes to the   Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"
 configuration

 Changing settings while the Peer  Net Config Peer
 service is running

 Pausing and continuing the Peer   Net Continue and Net Pause
 service

 Stopping the Peer service         Net Stop

 Using the Peer service            Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide
                                   for MSOS/2


 Net Start Remoteboot
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start remoteboot command starts the Remoteboot service. The
 Remoteboot service provides boot software for workstations.


 Syntax

   net start remoteboot [/configfile:pathname]
   [/maxthreads:number] [/rpldir:pathname] [/rpln:filename,
   filename, filename]

 where

 /configfile:pathname
   Is the name of the MS-DOS boot block configuration file. The file contains
   information about network device drivers, the boot block processor, and
   the loader that accesses the boot image file used by the Remoteboot
   service to boot MS-DOS workstations. This file is either relative to the
   directory specified by /rpldir or an absolute pathname. The default
   filename is DOSBB.CNF.

 /maxthreads:number
   Is the maximum number of workstations that the server is able to boot
   simultaneously. The range is 0 to the maximum number of threads set in the
   threads entry of the CONFIG.SYS file; the default is 10 workstations.

 /rpldir:pathname
   Is the path to the RPL directory. It can be an absolute path or a path
   relative to the LANMAN directory. The pathname is REPL\EXPORT\RPL if the
   server is replicating the RPL directory, or RPL if it is not.

 /rpln:filename
   Is the dynamic link library file that supports the network cards. As many
   as 12 network adapter cards are supported. The value for the adapter rpln
   option must be three filenames, each ending in .DLL. Separate these
   filename entries with a comma, or use quotation marks and separate the
   filename entries with a space. For example, the entry for rpl1 would be

   /rpl1:"rplnet1.dll rplnet2.dll rploem.dll"

 To start the Remoteboot service using the values set in the LANMAN.INI file,
 type net start remoteboot without options.


 Comments

 Start the Remoteboot service on servers that maintain a boot image for
 MS-DOS or MS OS/2 workstations. With the LAN Manager Remoteboot service,
 workstations can obtain boot software over the network. This works by
 installing an RPL ROM chip on the workstation's network adapter card. When
 the workstation is turned on, it broadcasts a boot request. A server
 designated to respond sends back boot software.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The server's MS OS/2 license does not extend to other computers. You must
 have one valid MS-DOS or MS OS/2 license for each remoteboot workstation.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Set up the Remoteboot service by installing the necessary files and
 directories on the server. Run the makeimg utility to create a boot volume
 for MS-DOS workstations. Appendix A, "The LANMAN Directory," summarizes the
 Remoteboot service directory. See "The LANMAN\RPL Directory" and "The
 LANMAN\RPLUSER Directory" sections. Once the directories are created, copy
 operating system software to the appropriate subdirectory (DOS or OS2).

 For more information about the Remoteboot service and booting workstations
 remotely, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Installation Guide and the Microsoft
 LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.


 Example

 To start the Remoteboot service using values from the LANMAN.INI file, type


   net start remoteboot

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Making permanent changes to the   Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"
 configuration

 Running the makeimg utility       Chapter 3, "Utilities," Makeimg

 Booting workstations remotely     Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 14

 Setting up the Remoteboot         Microsoft LAN Manager Installation Guide
 service


 Net Start Replicator

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start replicator command starts the Replicator service. The
 Replicator service ensures that designated files are identical on specified
 servers.


 Syntax

   net start replicator [/replicate:{export
   | import | both}] [/exportpath:pathname] [/exportlist:list]
   [/importpath:pathname] [/importlist:list] [options]

 where

 options
   Determine how and when notices and updates to files and directories are
   made. The options are as follows:

     /guardtime:time
       Sets the number of minutes an export directory must be stable (no
       changes to any files) before import servers can replicate its files.
       This option applies only to directories with tree integrity. (For more
       information about integrity, see the "Comments" section.) The range
       for /guardtime is 0 to half the value of /interval; the default is 2
       minutes.

     /interval:time
       Sets how often (in minutes) an export server checks the replicated
       directories for changes. This option is ignored on import servers. The
       range is 1-60; the default is 5 minutes.

     /logon:username
       Sets a username for the Replicator service to use (for accessing files
       at the export server) when no username is logged on at the import
       server. This username should be given RA permission to the replicated
       files on the export server. The default is the import server's
       computername.


     /password:{password | *}
       Is the password the import server uses when it accesses an export
       server. When no one is using the import server as a workstation, the
       import server tries to start a session with the export server when it
       needs to update its files, using the value of /logon as the username
       and the value of /password as the password. Specify * to be prompted
       for a password. The * value can be used only from the command line,
       not in the LANMAN.INI file. The default value for /password is null
       (no password).

     /pulse:number
       Specifies how often the export server repeats sending the last update
       notice. These repeat notices are sent even when no changes have
       occurred, so that import servers that missed the original update
       notice can receive the notice. The server waits (/pulse * /interval)
       minutes before sending each repeat notice. The range is 1-10; the
       default is 3.

     /random:seconds
       Sets the maximum number of seconds an import server can wait before
       requesting an update. An import server uses the export server's value
       of /random to generate a random number of seconds (from 0 to /random).
       The import server will wait this long after receiving an update notice
       before requesting the replica from the export server. This prevents
       the export server from being overloaded by simultaneous update
       requests. The range is 1-120; the default is 60 seconds.

     /tryuser:{yes | no}
       Sets whether the import server attempts to update its replicas of the
       files while a user is logged on to the network, using that import
       server as a workstation. If the value is yes, the import server uses
       that user's permissions to try to access the files (the user must have
       RA permissions for the REPL\EXPORT directory). If the value is no, the
       import server updates its files only when no one is logged on. The
       default is yes.

 /replicate:
   Determines whether the server exports files and directories, imports files
   and directories, or does both. This option must be provided from the
   command line or with the entry in the [replicator] section of the
   LANMAN.INI file. The default is import.

     export
       Determines that the server maintains a master tree to be replicated.

     import
       Determines that the server receives update notices from the export
       server.

     both
       Determines that the server is to export and import directories or
       files.

 /exportpath:pathname
   Sets the path to the export directory. The pathname can be an absolute
   path or a path relative to the LANMAN directory. All files to be
   replicated must be in a subdirectory of the export directory. The default
   path is REPL\EXPORT. This option is ignored if /replicate is set to
   import.

 /exportlist:list
   Lists as many as 32 servers or domains that receive notices when the
   export directory is updated. These servers subsequently replicate from the
   export server. Without a list, the export server sends a notice to its
   domain. When specifying a computername, do not include the two backslashes
   (\\) at the beginning of the name. Separate multiple list names with a
   semicolon (;). This option is ignored if /replicate is set to import.

 /importpath:pathname
   Sets the path on the import server to receive replicas from the export
   servers. The pathname can be an absolute path or a path relative to the
   LANMAN directory. The default is REPL\IMPORT. This option is ignored if
   /replicate is set to export.


 /importlist:list
   Lists as many as 32 servers and domains that export directories to the
   import server. If no list is specified, updates come from the import
   server's domain. When specifying a computername, do not include the two
   backslashes (\\) at the beginning of the name. Separate multiple list
   names with a semicolon (;). This entry is ignored if /replicate is set to
   export.

 To to start the Replicator service using the values set in the LANMAN.INI
 file, type net start replicator without options. File entries that apply
 only to export servers are ignored at import servers, and vice versa.


 Comments


 Start the Replicator service to ensure that designated files are exactly the
 same on all specified servers.

 Individual replicated directories are controlled on the export server by
 entries in a file called REPL.INI. The entries are integrity and extent.
 These entries have one of two values: file or tree. The entries in the
 REPL.INI file have the following format:

 integrity=[file | tree] extent=[file | tree]

 The value for integrity determines when a master tree is updated. If
 integrity is set to file, an import server can get a replica of that file
 when it is not currently in use (being changed or replicated). When
 integrity is set to tree, every file and directory in the tree must be
 stable for the time specified by /guardtime before being replicated. The
 default is file. If integrity is set to file, the /guardtime option is
 ignored.

 A USERLOCK.xxx file in a directory also prevents an import server from
 trying to update files; but, when integrity is set to file, the Replicator
 service does not check for lock files. (Some applications can put a lock
 file in a directory. For an explanation of how this is done, see the
 application software manual.)

 The value for extent determines whether subdirectories are to be replicated
 (tree), or only files in the first-level directory are to be replicated
 (file). The default is tree.

 A REPL.INI file can be placed in each directory and is not replicated. If
 you change a REPL.INI file, stop and restart the Replicator service for the
 change to take effect.

 For more information about the Replicator service and replicating files and
 directories, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.


 Examples


   a.  To start the Replicator service, type

       net start replicator


   b.  To start the Replicator service and provide logon information for the
       service, type

       net start replicator /logon:repluser /password:*



 See Also


 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Replicating files and             Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 directories                       Guide, Chapter 13





 Net Start Server
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start server command starts the Server service. The Server service
 enables a computer to share resources on the network.


 Syntax

 net start server [options]

 where

 options
   Make temporary changes to the server's configuration when the Server
   service is started. The following options can be in any order on the
   command line:

     /accessalert:n
       Sets the number of permission violations that can occur within an
       /alertsched interval before sending an alert message to the usernames
       in the /alertnames list. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5
       permission violations.

     /alertnames:name
       Lists usernames to receive alert messages. Separate multiple name
       entries with a comma or semicolon (;).

     /alertsched:time
       Sets the number of minutes between checks for alert conditions. The
       range is 0- 65535; the default is 5 minutes.

     /auditing:{yes | no | event[,...]}
       Turns auditing on or off, or determines auditing for specified events.
       (To cancel auditing for an event, use the /noauditing option.) Audit
       events are logon, logonlimit, netlogon, goodnetlogon, permissions,
       resource, service, sesslogon, badsesslogon, goodsesslogon, use,
       baduse, gooduse, and userlist. Separate multiple event entries with a
       comma or semicolon (;). For more information about these events, see
       the "Comments" section. The default is no.

     /autodisconnect:time
       Sets the number of minutes a workstation's session with the server can
       be idle before the session is disconnected. This option is available
       only to a server with an Unlimited User Pak. You can enter a value of
       -1 to never disconnect a workstation. The range is -1-65535; the
       default is -1.

     /autopath:pathname
       Sets the location and filename for the server's profile. The pathname
       can be absolute or a network pathname. The filename is relative to the
       LAN Manager LANMAN\PROFILES directory. The default filename is
       SRVAUTO.PRO.

     /autoprofile:value
       Determines how to save and/or load a server profile when the Server
       service is stopped or started. The value is load, save, both, or none.
       The load value loads the profile when the service starts; save saves a
       profile before the service stops. When the option is set to both,
       /autoprofile automates both loading and saving; none prevents both
       operations. The default is load.

     /diskalert:n
       Sets the minimum number of free kilobytes that must be on the hard
       disk. When free space falls below this limit, LAN Manager sends an
       alert message to the usernames in the /alertnames list. The range is
       0-65535; the default is 300 kilobytes.

     /erroralert:n
       Sets the number of errors that can occur within an /alertsched before
       triggering an alert message. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5
       errors.

     /guestacct:name
       Indicates the server's guest account. The default name is guest.

     /logonalert:n
       Sets the number of consecutive logon violations that trigger an alert
       message. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5 violations.

     /maxauditlog:n
       Sets the maximum number of kilobytes for the audit trail. The range is
       0-65535; the default is 100 kilobytes.

     /maxchdevjob:n
       Sets the maximum number of requests that can be queued to the server's
       communication-device queues (comm queues). The range is 0-65535; the
       default is 6 requests.

     /maxchdevq:n
       Sets the maximum number of comm queues that the server can have. The
       range is 0-65535; the default is 2 comm queues.

     /maxchdevs:n
       Sets the maximum number of communication devices that can be shared on
       the server. The range is 0-16; the default is 2 communication devices.

     /maxconnections:n
       Sets the maximum number of simultaneous connections to shared
       resources on the server. The range is /maxusers to 2000; the default
       is 128 connections.

     /maxlocks:n
       Sets the maximum number of file locks the server can accommodate at
       one time. The range is 1-8000; the default is 64 file locks.

     /maxopens:n
       Sets the maximum number of shared files and devices that can be open
       simultaneously. The range is 1-8000; the default is 64 opens.

     /maxsearches:n
       Sets the maximum number of file searches the server can perform at one
       time. The range is 0-1927; the default is 50 file searches.

     /maxsessopens:n
       Sets the maximum number of open files one session can have. The range
       is 1 to /maxopens; the default is 50 open files.

     /maxsessreqs:n
       Sets the maximum number of resource requests one workstation can
       submit to the server. The range is 1-65535; the default is 50
       requests.

     /maxsessvcs:n
       Sets the maximum number of sessions one workstation can have with the
       server. This entry must be set to 1.

     /maxshares:n
       Sets the maximum number of resources that can be shared
       simultaneously. The range is 2-500; the default is 16 resources.

     /maxusers:n
       Sets the maximum number of users who can use the server
       simultaneously. The value of /maxusers should include the number
       allowed by your Additional User Pak(s) plus the number of users
       accessing the server through IPC connections (named pipes, used by
       network application programs such as the net run command or Microsoft
       SQL Server). The range is 1-1000; the default is 32 users.

     /netioalert:n
       Sets the number of network input/output (I/O) errors that trigger an
       alert. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5 I/O errors.

     /noauditing:event[;...]
       Cancels auditing for the named events when /auditing is set to yes.
       The events are logon, logonlimit, netlogon, goodnetlogon, permissions,
       resource, service, sesslogon, badsesslogon, goodsesslogon, use,
       baduse, gooduse, and userlist. If /auditing is set to no, the value of
       /noauditing is ignored. Separate multiple event entries with a comma
       or semicolon (;). For more information about these events, see the
       "Comments" section.

     /numadmin:n
       Sets the maximum number of users who can perform administrative tasks
       simultaneously on the server. The maximum number of users set when
       sharing ADMIN$ (see net share /users:number) overrides the value of
       /numadmin when they are not the same. The range is 0-65535; the
       default is 2 users.

     /numbigbuf:n
       Sets the number of big buffers that the server uses. The range is
       0-80; the default is 3 big buffers.

     /numfiletasks:n
       Sets the number of file-worker threads that the server has. The range
       is 1-8; the default is 1 file-worker thread.

     /numreqbuf:n
       Sets the maximum number of buffers (in addition to the big buffers)
       that the server can have. The range is 5-300; the default is 15
       buffers.

     /security:{user | share}
       Sets user-level or share-level security. The default is user. To
       permanently change the value of /security, use the Setup program.

     /sizreqbuf:n
       Sets the maximum number of bytes for server buffers (other than big
       buffers). The range is 1024-32768; the default is 4096 bytes.

     /srvanndelta:n
       Sets the number of milliseconds to add to or subtract from
       /srvannounce. This helps to even out data traffic on the network. The
       range is 0-65535; the default is 3000 milliseconds.

     /srvannounce:n
       Sets the number of seconds between announcements (if the server is not
       hidden). The range is 0-65535; the default is 60 seconds.

     /srvcomment:"text"
       Supplies a descriptive comment about the server. The comment can have
       as many as 48 characters. Enclose the text in quotation marks.

     /srvheuristics:numbers
       Is a set of digits that adjust the performance of the server. The
       digits and values are described in Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File."

     /srvhidden:{yes | no}
       Omits the server name from lists of servers displayed by the net view
       command (yes) or restores a hidden server name to lists of servers
       (no). The default is no.

     /srvnets:name[,...]
       Lists the names of networks in which the server is working. This entry
       has the same network names as those in the [networks] section of the
       LANMAN.INI file. Separate multiple name entries with a comma.

     /srvservices:service[ ...]
       Names the LAN Manager services to start when the Server service
       starts. This entry has the same service names as those in the
       [services] section of the LANMAN.INI file. Separate multiple service
       names with a space. Service names cannot be abbreviated. The default
       is alerter.

     /userpath:pathname
       Specifies the path and directory holding the user directories. A
       pathname can be absolute, a network path, or relative to the LANMAN
       directory. The default is LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS.

 To start the Server service using the values set in the LANMAN.INI file,
 type net start server without options.


 Comments

 Start the Server service to share a server's resources with users on the
 network. To automatically start a server that has local security, place net
 start server /y in the STARTUP.CMD program.

 In addition to the options listed, all of the net start workstation command
 options work with the net start server command if the workstation is not yet
 started.

 When setting audited events with the /auditing and /noauditing options, use
 the following list as a guide for choosing event entries:

 logon
   Audit all logon requests.

 logonlimit
   Audit when user logon limit is reached.

 netlogon
   Audit all network logon and logoff attempts.

 goodnetlogon
   Audit successful network logon requests.

 permissions
   Audit changes to permissions.

 resource
   Audit any attempts to use resources.*

 service
   Audit each time a user starts or stops one of the server's services.

 sesslogon
   Audit all session logon and logoff attempts.

 badsesslogon
   Audit unsuccessful session logon requests.

 goodsesslogon
   Audit successful session logon requests.

 use
   Audit all use of resources.

 baduse
   Audit unsuccessful attempts to use resources.*

 gooduse
   Audit successful use of resources.*

 userlist
   Audit changes to the user accounts list.

 * See the /trail, /failure, and /success options of the net access command
 for more information about auditing resources.


 Examples


   a.  To start the server using the settings in the LANMAN.INI file, type

       net start server


   b.  To start the server, and name the guest account special, type

       net start server /guestacct:special


   c.  To start the server, limit the number of simultaneous connections to
       resources, and request an alert for each fifth consecutive occurrence
       of an error, type

       net start server /maxconnections:140 /erroralert:5



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Making permanent changes to the   Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"
 configuration

 Starting and configuring servers  Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 2

 Monitoring the network            Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 16

 Displaying server configuration   Net Config


 Net Start Timesource
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start timesource command starts the Timesource service. The
 Timesource service designates a server as the time source for a domain.


 Syntax

 net start timesource

 To start the Timesource service, type net start timesource.


 Comments

 Start the Timesource service at a server to designate the server as the time
 source for the domain. The Timesource service does not guarantee the
 accuracy of the server's clock.

 Other computers synchronize with the time source by using the net time
 command.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Synchronizing network time        Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 16

 Synchronizing with the time       Net Time
 source


 Net Start UPS
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start ups command starts the UPS (uninterruptible power supply)
 service. The UPS service is used with a battery to protect a server from
 data loss during a power failure.


 Syntax

   net start ups [/batterytime:seconds] [/cmdfile:pathname]
   [/messdelay:seconds] [/messtime:seconds] [/recharge:minutes]
   [/signals:###] [/voltlevels:###]

 where

 /batterytime:seconds
   Sets the number of seconds the server can run on a battery before the UPS
   service initiates shutdown. This entry is optional, since it is relevant
   only if the low battery signal is unavailable. Set the value of this entry
   based on the battery specification. The range is 0-28800; the default is
   60 seconds.

 /cmdfile:pathname
   Sets the pathname for the .CMD batch program. This program contains
   commands that are run when the server begins to shut down. The pathname
   can be absolute or relative to the LANMAN directory. The default is null
   (empty), implying no .CMD program should be run.

 /messdelay:seconds
   Sets the number of seconds between the initial power failure and the first
   message sent to users. No messages are sent if power is restored within
   this amount of time. The range is 0-120; the default is 5 seconds.

 /messtime:seconds
   Sets the number of seconds between messages sent to users notifying them
   of a continued power failure. The range is 30-300; the default is 120
   seconds.

 /recharge:minutes
   Sets the number of minutes of recharge time required for each minute of
   battery runtime. This entry is optional depending on the battery
   specification. The range is 5-250; the default is 100 minutes.

 /signals:###
   Specifies the signals available from the battery. This is a three-digit
   value as follows:


   ş   The first digit is 1 if the battery can signal the UPS service upon
       power failure, and 0 if it cannot. The default for the first digit is
       1.

       ş   The second digit is 0 if the battery does not signal the UPS
           service about low power, and 1 if it signals when a specified
           amount, such as two minutes or five minutes worth, of power
           remains. The default for the second digit is 0.

       ş   The third digit is 1 if the battery accepts a shutdown signal from
           the UPS software, and 0 if it does not. If the third digit is 1,
           the UPS service does an orderly shutdown of the LAN Manager
           software, and then the battery stops providing backup power to the
           computer. When the battery detects power restoration, it restarts
           the computer. The default for the third digit is 0.

           NOTE  If neither of the first two digits is set to 1, the UPS
           service does not start.

           /voltlevels:###
   Specifies the voltage levels for the signals listed in the /signals entry.
   This is a three-digit value set as follows:


   ş   The first digit is 0 if the battery uses a negative voltage to signal
       the UPS service of a power failure, and 1 if it uses a positive
       voltage. The default for the first digit is 1.

       ş   The second digit is 0 if the battery uses a negative voltage to
           signal the UPS service that it has less than two minutes of power
           remaining, and 1 if it uses a positive voltage. The default for
           the second digit is 0.

       ş   The third digit is 0 if the battery recognizes a negative voltage
           as the shutoff signal, and 1 if it recognizes a positive voltage.
           The default for the third digit is 0.

           NOTE  The /batterytime, /recharge, /signals, and /voltlevels
           options should be configured based on the power supply
           specification. If the low battery voltage level is not set
           correctly, the Server service will not start.

 To start the UPS service using the values set in the LANMAN.INI file, type
 net start ups without options.




 Comments

 Start the UPS service and connect an uninterruptible power supply (battery)
 to a serial port on a server to protect the server from data loss during a
 power failure. See the power supply manual(s) for information about
 installation and maintenance of the power supply.

 During a power failure, an uninterruptible power supply provides backup
 power until normal power is restored, or until an orderly shutdown of the
 server can occur. For an orderly shutdown, the UPS service waits for the
 interval set with the /messdelay option, and, if the main power is not
 restored within this interval, the UPS service pauses the Server service and
 instructs users to disconnect from the server. It sends further notices to
 users of the server every /messtime seconds, until power is restored.

 During a power failure, if the UPS service determines that the battery is
 about to run out of power, it will


   ş   Run the file specified by the /cmdfile option (if any) for up to 30
       seconds

   ş   Stop all LAN Manager services

   ş   Shut down the computer


 If an inverter shutdown is used, the battery can restart the computer when
 main power is restored. If you set up your UPS service for inverter
 shutdown, make sure a file such as STARTUP.CMD or PRIVINIT.CMD restarts the
 server when power is restored.


 Example

 To start the UPS service, type

   net start ups

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 PRIVINIT.CMD                      Chapter 3, "Utilities," SECURESH.EXE

 Guarding against data loss        Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 15


 Net Start Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start workstation command starts the Workstation service. The
 Workstation service enables a computer to connect to and use network
 resources.


 Syntax

 net start workstation [options]

 where

 options
   Make temporary changes to the Workstation service configuration when the
   service is started. The following options can be in any order on the
   command line:

     /charcount:bytes
       Sets the amount of data LAN Manager collects before sending it to a
       communication device. If /chartime:msec is also set, LAN Manager acts
       on whichever option is satisfied first. The range is 0-65535; the
       default is 16 bytes.

     /chartime:msec
       Sets the number of milliseconds LAN Manager collects data before
       sending it to a communication device. If /charcount:bytes is also set,
       LAN Manager acts on whichever option is satisfied first. You can enter
       a value of -1 for the /chartime option to be ignored and have
       characters sent when the buffer with /charcount size is filled. The
       range is 0-65535000; the default is 250 milliseconds.

     /charwait:sec
       Sets the number of seconds LAN Manager waits for a communication
       device to become available. The range is 0-65535; the default is 3600
       seconds.

     /computername:name
       Is a unique name that identifies the server or workstation on the
       network. The Workstation service won't start if the computername
       matches any other computername or domain name on the network, the
       username of any user currently logged on to the network, or any
       message alias currently in use on the network.

       Computernames can have 1-15 characters, including letters, numbers,
       and the following symbols:

       ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

     /domain:name
       Is the name of the workstation domain. The name can have 1-15
       characters, including letters, numbers, and the symbols listed with
       /computername.

     /keepconn:sec
       Sets the number of seconds LAN Manager maintains an inactive
       connection to a shared resource. Unused connections are canceled after
       this interval is reached. The range is 1-65535; the default is 600
       seconds.

     /keepsearch:sec
       Sets the number of seconds LAN Manager maintains a directory search
       request. Directory search requests are discarded after this interval
       is reached. The range is 1-65535; the default is 600 seconds.

     /mailslots:{yes | no}
       Determines whether or not the workstation can receive second-class
       mailslots. If the value is no, a user at the workstation cannot log on
       in a domain running the Netlogon service and can't use the net view
       command. If the value is set to no on a server, the server can't run
       the Replicator or Netlogon services. The default is yes.

     /maxcmds:n
       Sets the number of NetBIOS commands LAN Manager can run
       simultaneously. The range is 5-255; the default is 16 NetBIOS
       commands.

     /maxerrorlog:kbytes
       Sets the number of kilobytes for the error log. The range is 2 to
       total disk size; the default is 100 kilobytes.

     /maxthreads:n
       Sets the number of MS OS/2 execution threads that can use LAN Manager
       simultaneously. The range is 10-254; the default is 10 threads.

     /maxwrkcache:kbytes
       Sets the number of kilobytes reserved for large transfers of data. The
       range is 0-640; the default is 64 kilobytes.

     /numalerts:n
       Sets the number of program tasks that can wait for an alert condition.
       The range is 3-200; the default is 12 program tasks.

     /numcharbuf:n
       Sets the number of character device and pipe buffers the workstation
       uses. The range is 0-15; the default is 10 character and pipe buffers.

     /numdgrambuf:n
       Sets the number of buffers available for receiving information
       (datagrams). The value you set for /numdgrambuf is the number of
       buffers available for each network listed in the /wrknets entry. The
       range is 8-112; the default is 14 buffers.

     /numservices:n
       Sets the maximum number of services that LAN Manager can run
       simultaneously. The range is 4-256; the default is 8 services.

     /numworkbuf:n
       Sets the number of buffers the workstation uses. The range is 3-50;
       the default is 15 buffers.

     /othdomains:names[,...]
       Lists up to four other domains in which the workstation can view
       servers and receive messages. Separate multiple name entries with a
       comma.

     /printbuftime:sec
       Sets the number of seconds the prn: print device is kept open (for
       compatibility-mode print requests). Most applications that use MS OS/2
       compatibility mode do not explicitly close the prn: print device to
       tell MS OS/2 to send the contents of the print buffer to the printer
       queue. The range is 0-65535; the default is 90 seconds.

     /sesstimeout:sec
       Sets the number of seconds LAN Manager maintains a connection to a
       server that isn't responding. The range is 10-65535; the default is 45
       seconds.

     /sizcharbuf:bytes
       Sets the number of bytes for each character device and named pipe
       buffer. The range is 64-4096; the default is 512 bytes.

     /sizerror:bytes
       Sets the number of bytes for the workstation's internal error buffer.
       The range is 256-4096; the default is 1024 bytes.

     /sizworkbuf:bytes
       Sets the number of bytes for each workstation buffer. The value should
       be a multiple of 512. The range is 1024-16384; the default is 4096
       bytes.

     /wrkheuristics:string
       Is a set of digits that adjust the performance of the workstation. The
       digits and values are described in Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File."

     /wrknets:name[,...]
       Specifies the network(s) in which the workstation participates.
       Separate multiple name entries with a comma. These names are listed in
       the [networks] section of the LANMAN.INI file.

     /wrkservices:service[,...]
       Lists LAN Manager services that start automatically when the
       Workstation service starts. Separate multiple service names with a
       comma. Service names cannot be abbreviated.

 To start the Workstation service using the values set in the LANMAN.INI
 file, type net start workstation without options.


 Comments

 Start the Workstation service so that your computer can use information and
 equipment on the network. Each option of the net start workstation command
 corresponds to an entry in the [workstation] section of the LANMAN.INI file.
 The Workstation service must be started before any other service can start.



 Examples


   a.  To start a workstation and temporarily view another domain, type

       net start workstation /othdomain:legal


   b.  To start a workstation, limiting the error log to five kilobytes, type

       net start workstation /maxerrorlog:5



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Making permanent changes to the   Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File"
 configuration

 Starting and configuring          Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 workstations                      Guide, Chapter 2; Microsoft LAN Manager
                                   User's Guide

 Changing settings while the       Net Config Workstation
 Workstation service is running

 Pausing and continuing the        Net Continue and Net Pause
 Workstation service

 Stopping the Workstation service  Net Stop


 Net Statistics
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net statistics command displays or clears the statistics log.


 Syntax

 net statistics [workstation | server | peer] [/clear]

 where

 workstation
   Displays statistics for the workstation.

 server
   Displays statistics for the server.

 peer
   Displays statistics for the workstation running the Peer service.

 /clear
   Clears the statistics log.

 To list the running services for which statistics are available, type net
 statistics without options.

 This command can also be typed net stats.


 Comments

 Use the net statistics command to display performance information for the
 specified service.


 At a server and a workstation running the Peer service:

 LAN Manager reports the server's computername, the date and time when the
 statistics were last updated, and the following information:


   ş   The number of sessions that were started, disconnected automatically,
       and disconnected because of an error

   ş   The number of kilobytes sent and received, and the average server
       response time

   ş   The number of errors and violations of password and permission limits

   ş   The number of times the shared files, printers, and communication
       devices were used

   ş   The number of times the memory buffer sizes were exceeded



 At a workstation:

 LAN Manager reports the workstation's computername, the date and time when
 the statistics were last updated, and the following information:


   ş   The number of times the workstation sent or received data over the
       network

   ş   The number of errors related to network transactions

   ş   The number of kilobytes sent and received by the workstation during
       transactions

   ş   The number of sessions that were started from the workstation at
       network servers

   ş   The number of sessions that failed, were disconnected, and were
       reconnected

   ş   The number of connections to shared resources that succeeded or failed

   ş   The number of times the memory buffer sizes were exceeded



 Examples


   a.  To display running services for which statistics are available, type

       net stats


   b.  To display statistics for the server, and prevent the display from
       scrolling, type

       net statistics server | more



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Auditing                          Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 16

 Configuring services              Net Config Peer, Net Config Server, Net
                                   Config Workstation, Net Start Peer, Net
                                   Start Server, and Net Start Workstation


 Net Status
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net status command displays configuration settings and shared resources
 on the local server.


 Syntax

 net status

 To display the current configuration for and information about all resources
 shared by the local server, type net status.


 Comments

 Use the net status command to get a combination of the information displayed
 by the net config and net share commands. The net status command is provided
 for compatibility with Microsoft Networks for MS-DOS version 1.0 and IBM
 PC-LAN version 1.2.


 Example

 To display information about a remote server (the password is schedule), and
 prevent the display from scrolling, type

   net admin \\production schedule /command net status | more

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Monitoring the network            Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 16

 Other commands that display       Net Audit, Net Config Server, Net Share,
 status information                and Net Statistics


 Net Stop
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net stop command stops a service.


 Syntax

 net stop service

 where

 service
   Includes alerter, messenger, netlogon, netpopup, netrun, peer, remoteboot,
   replicator, server, timesource, ups, and workstation.


 Comments

 Stop a service to remove the network function it performs and remove the
 software from memory. For example, when you stop the Workstation service,
 LAN Manager ends all sessions with servers on the network, cancels all
 connections (made with the net use command) to shared resources, logs the
 username off from the network, and stops all other services.

 Stopping the Server service prevents users from accessing the server's
 shared resources. If you stop the server when users are accessing resources,
 LAN Manager displays a warning message, requesting confirmation that you
 want to cancel the connections. A Y response cancels all connections to the
 server. To stop the Server service, the user logged on must have
 administrative privilege.

 Before stopping the Server service, you can


   ş   Pause the service (to disallow new connections)

   ş   Send a message advising users to disconnect from the server's
       resources

   ş   Save, in a profile, the commands that share and configure the server's
       resources

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Controlling services from the     Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 LAN Manager Screen                Guide, Chapter 2

 Using /yes and /no                Chapter 1, "Introduction"

 Using profiles                    Net Load and Net Save

 Starting, pausing, and            Net Continue, Net Pause, and Net Start
 continuing services




 Net Time
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net time command synchronizes the workstation's clock with that of a
 server or domain, or displays the time for a server or domain.


 Syntax

 net time [\\computername | /domain[:name]] [/set]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the name of a server.

 /domain[:name]
   Is the server that controls domain activity in your workstation domain
   (LAN Manager finds this server for you). Use name to specify a different
   domain.

 /set
   Synchronizes the workstation's clock with that of the specified server or
   domain.

 To display the current date and time at your domain's designated time
 server, type net time without options.


 Examples


   a.  To see the time and date in the accounting domain, type

       net time /domain:accounting


   b.  To set your clock to the time and date on the accounting domain, type

       net time /domain:accounting /set



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Synchronizing network time        Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 16

 Starting the Timesource service   Net Start Timesource


 Net Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net use command connects a workstation to or disconnects a workstation
 from a shared resource, or displays information about workstation
 connections.


 Syntax

 net use [devicename] [\\computername\sharename [password | *]]

 net use printdevicename [\\computername\sharename [password | *] /comm]

 net use {devicename | \\computername\sharename} /delete

 where

 devicename
   Assigns a name to connect to the resource or specifies the device to be
   disconnected. There are three kinds of devicenames: disk drives (D:
   through Z:), printers (LPT1: through LPT9:), and communication-device
   queues (COM1: through COM9:).

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server controlling the shared resource.

 \sharename
   Is the network name of the shared resource.

 password
   Is the password needed to access the shared resource.

 *
   Produces a promt for the password. The password will not be displayed when
   you type it.

 printdevicename
   Is the name of a printer device (LPT1: through LPT9:).

 /comm
   Specifies that an LPT devicename is to be connected to a
   communication-device (unspooled) queue. This indicates that even though an
   LPT devicename is assigned, the connection is to a communication-device
   queue (comm queue).

 /delete
   Cancels a network connection.

 To get a list of the workstation's connections, type net use without
 options.


 Comments

 Use the net use command to connect to and disconnect from a network
 resource, and to view your current connections to network resources. You
 cannot disconnect from a shared directory if it's used as your current drive
 or if it's currently used in another MS OS/2 session. You must change to
 another drive first.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 You can use shared resources without making a connection with net use. The
 connections are made automatically by some network programs or by MS OS/2
 when the network path of the resource is specified with a command. If the
 resource is protected by a password, you must establish access with net use.
 You don't need to assign a devicename to establish access. Just type net
 use, the network path of the resource, and the password.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 There are several ways to get information about a connection:


   ş   Type net use devicename to get information about a specific
       connection.

   ş   Type net use and the network path (\\computername\sharename) of the
       resource to get information about a specific connection. This command
       may have to be entered twice; first to establish a connection, then to
       get information about it.

   ş   Type net use to get a list of all the workstation's connections.



 Examples


   a.  To assign the disk drive devicename E: to the LETTERS shared directory
       on the \\FINANCIAL server, type

       net use e: \\financial\letters


   b.  To assign the devicename LPT1: to the LASER2 shared printer queue on
       the \\ACCOUNTING server, type

       net use lpt1: \\accounting\laser2


   c.  To disconnect from the LPT1: printer queue, type

       net use lpt1: /delete


   d.  To establish access to the \\FINANCIAL server's SCRATCH shared
       directory, which requires the password hctarcs, type

       net use \\financial\scratch hctarcs


   e.  To disconnect form the \\FINANCIAL\SCRATCH directory, type

       net use \\financial\scratch /delete


   f.  To assign the LPT1: devicename to the \\SALES server's DOT comm queue,
       type

       net use lpt1: \\sales\dot /comm



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Restoring a set of saved          Net Load
 connections

 Logging on to the network         Net Logon

 Pausing and continuing            Net Continue and Net Pause
 connections

 Saving your workstation's         Net Save
 current connections

 Checking whether a printer queue  Net View
 is "Print" or "Comm"

 Making connections                Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide


 Net User

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net user command adds or modifies user accounts or displays user account
 information on servers with user-level security.


 Syntax

 net user [username [password | *] [options]]

 net user username {password | *} /add [options]

 net user username [/delete]

 where

 username
   Is the name of the user account (with as many as 20 characters) to add,
   delete, modify, or view.

 password
   Assigns or changes a password (with as many as 14 characters) for the
   user's account. A password must satisfy any minimum length set with the
   /minpwlen option of the net accounts command.

 *
   Produces a prompt for the password. The password will not be displayed
   when you type it.

 options
   Are as follows:

     /active:{no | yes}
       Deactivates or activates the user account. If the user account is not
       active, the user cannot access resources on the server. The default is
       yes (active).

     /comment:"text"
       Provides a descriptive comment about the user's account. This comment
       can have as many as 48 characters. Enclose the text in quotation
       marks.

     /countrycode:nnn
       Uses the operating system country codes to implement the specified
       language files for a user's help and error messages. A value of 0
       signifies the default country code. See Appendix C, "Country Codes,"
       for a list of country codes.

     /expires:{date | never}
       Causes the user account to expire if date is set; never sets no time
       limit on the user account. Expiration dates can be in mm,dd,yy or
       dd,mm,yy format, depending on the /countrycode. Note that the account
       expires at the beginning of the date specified. Months can be a
       number, spelled out, or abbreviated with three letters. Year can be
       two or four numbers. Use a comma or slash to separate parts of the
       date (no spaces). If yy is omitted, the next occurrence of the date
       (according to your computer's date and time) is assumed. For example,
       the following date entries are equivalent if entered between Jan. 10,
       1990 and Jan. 8, 1991:

       jan,9     1/9/91     january,9,1991     1/9

     /fullname:"name"
       Adds a user's given name (rather than username). Enclose the name in
       quotation marks.

     /homedir:pathname
       Sets the pathname for the user's home directory. The suggested
       pathname is drive:\LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS\userdir. The pathname can
       be an absolute path or a network path.

     /homedirreq:{yes | no}
       Sets whether a home directory is required.

     /logonserver:{\\computername | \\*}
       Specifies a particular domain controller to verify the user's logon
       requests. The default value (blank) is any domain controller unless
       the account is the admin account created with the Setup program. This
       account defaults to the primary domain controller. Use \\computername
       to specify the computername of a domain controller. Use \\* to specify
       that any domain controller can validate the user's logon requests.

     /maxstorage:{number | unlimited}
       Sets the maximum amount of storage (in kilobytes) for a user's home
       directory. The default is unlimited.

     /operator:list[,...]
       Assigns limited administrative privileges. (A null value [blank]
       withholds operator privileges.) Separate multiple list entries with a
       comma. The operator privileges are as follows:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 accounts

                                   Lets a user control user and group
                                   accounts and update logon requirements
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  accounts and update logon requirements
                                   for the user accounts database. This
                                   operator privilege does not allow a user
                                   to grant administrative privilege or
                                   assign operator privilege.

 comm

                                   Lets a user control shared
                                   communication-device queues.

 print

                                   Lets a user control shared printer
                                   queues, modify the queue comment and the
                                   setting for the maximum number of users
                                   (see Net Share), and control print jobs.


 server
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
server

                                   Lets a user control shared resources on
                                   a server, read and clear the error log,
                                   and close sessions and files that are
                                   open.



     /passwordchg:{yes | no}
       Specifies whether users can change their own password. The default is
       yes.

     /passwordreq:{yes | no}
       Specifies whether a user account must have a password. The default is
       yes.

     /privilege:priv
       Assigns the user's privilege level as guest, user, or admin. Privilege
       level affects what LAN Manager commands the user can perform, and the
       user's rights to access shared resources. The default is user.

     /scriptpath[:pathname]
       Sets a pathname for the user's logon script. This pathname is relative
       to the directory listed in the scripts entry ([netlogon] section) of
       the LANMAN.INI file.

     /times:{times | all}
       Specifies the times the user is allowed to use the server. The times
       value is expressed as day[-day][,day[-day]]
       AB@%,time[-time][,time[-time]], limited to 1-hour time increments.
       Days can be spelled out or abbreviated (M,T,W,Th,F,Sa,Su). Hours can
       be 12- or 24-hour notation. For 12-hour notation, use AM, PM, or A.M.,
       P.M. The value all means a user can always log on. A null value
       (blank) means a user can never log on. Separate day and time with a
       comma, and units of day and time with a semicolon (for example,
       M,4AM-5PM;T,1PM-3PM). Do not use spaces when designating /times.

     /usercomment:"text"
       Lets an administrator add or change the "User comment" for the
       account. Users can add or change the "User comment" with the LAN
       Manager Screen. Enclose the text in quotation marks.

     /workstations:{computername[,...] | *}
       Lists as many as eight workstations from which a user can log on to
       the network. Separate multiple entries in the list with a comma. If
       /workstations has no list, or if the list is *, the user can log on
       from any workstation.

 /add
   Adds a user account to the user accounts database.

 /delete
   Removes a user account from the user accounts database.

 To view a list of the user accounts on the server, type net user without
 options. To view information about a particular user's account, type net
 user username.

 This command can also be typed net users.


 Comments

 Use the net user command to create and control user accounts for users in a
 domain. User account information is stored in the user accounts database
 (the NET.ACC file). Use the net access command to define the users'
 permissions to use shared resources.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE
 When you type the net user command at a backup domain controller or member
 server, changes to the user accounts database automatically occur on the
 primary domain controller and then are replicated to backup domain
 controllers and member servers.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 If you assign a country code, LAN Manager looks for a message file for the
 matching country code. If the file is available, messages to the user are
 sent from the file. The filename is NETnnn.MSG, where the nnn is replaced by
 the country code, as listed in Appendix C, "Country Codes." If the file is
 unavailable, the default country code is used.

 Setting up user accounts in a new domain is easier with the LAN Manager
 Screen (net admin). Dialog boxes prompt for information and provide
 information to remind you of all possible options that are available. With
 the LAN Manager Screen, after making one account, you can use it as a clone
 for additional accounts. When you use the screen to add new user accounts,
 select a user account similar to the one you are adding and choose the
 <Clone> command button. The resulting dialog box appears with text fields
 already filled. Change text fields as necessary.

 Do not assign a null password to an account with admin privilege.


 Examples


   a.  To display a list of all user accounts for the local server, type

       net user


   b.  To view information about the user account jimmyh, type

       net user jimmyh


   c.  To change benp's privilege to user, and change his password to
       tortoise, type

       net user benp tortoise /privilege:user


   d.  To add a user account for Henry James, with logon rights from 8 A.M.
       to 5 P.M. Monday through Friday (no spaces in time designations), a
       mandatory password, and the user's full name, type

       net user henryj henryj /add /passwordreq:yes
       /times:monday-friday,8am-5pm /fullname:"Henry
             James"


       The username (henryj) is entered the second time as the password.

   e.  To set johnsw's logon time (8 A.M. to 5 P.M.) using 24-hour notation,
       type

       net user johnsw /time:M-F,08:00-17:00


   f.  To set johnsw's logon time (8 A.M. to 5 P.M.) using 12-hour notation,
       type

       net user johnsw /time:M-F,8am-5pm


   g.  To specify logon hours of 4 A.M. until 5 P.M. on Monday, 1 P.M. until
       3 P.M. on Tuesday, and 8 A.M. until 5 P.M. Wednesday through Friday
       for marysl, type

       net user marysl /time:M,4am-5pm;T,1pm-3pm;W-F,8:00-17:00



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up and maintaining user   Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 accounts                          Guide, Part 2

 Assigning users permissions       Net Access

 Setting global account            Net Accounts
 requirements

 Creating groups                   Net Group

 Running the Netlogon service      Net Start Netlogon

 Viewing a list of users logged    Net Who
 on in a domain


 Net View
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net view command displays a list of servers or displays resources being
 shared by a server.


 Syntax

 net view [\\computername]

 where

 \\computername
   Specifies a server whose shared resources you want to view.

 To display a list of servers in your workstation domain, logon domain, and
 other domains, type net view without options.


 Comments

 Use the net view command to display a list of servers. The display is
 similar to the following:

   Server Name           Remark
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   \\PRODUCTION          Production file server
   \\PRINT1              Printer room, first floor
   \\PRINT2              Printer room, second floor


 Example

 To see a list of the resources shared by the \\PRODUCTION server, type

   net view \\production

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Using a resource shared by a      Net Use
 server

 Displaying a list of users        Net Who; Microsoft LAN Manager User's
                                   Guide


 Net Who
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net who command lists usernames currently logged on to the network.


 Syntax

 net who [/domain:name | \\computername | username]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server whose users you want information about.

 username
   Is the name of the user you want information about.

 /domain:name
   Is a domain (other than the domain in which you logged on) whose users you
   want information about.

 To display information about users in the logon domain, type net who without
 options.


 Comments

 Use the net who command to list usernames that are logged on in a domain.
 When you specify a username with net who, you get information about the
 user.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The net who command provides information about servers using LAN Manager
 version 2.0. Servers using a previous version of LAN Manager provide
 username information only if you have administrative privileges on the
 server.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Example

 To see a list of users in the headqtrs domain, type

   net who /domain:headqtrs

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Displaying accounts in a domain   Net User








 Chapter 3  LAN Manager Utilities
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter provides a reference page for each LAN Manager utility. The
 purpose and syntax for the utility, as well as comments, examples, and
 cross-references, are provided in the utility reference page. The utility
 reference pages are arranged in alphabetical order.

 For a summary of the names and purpose statements for LAN Manager commands
 and utilities, see the "LAN Manager Commands and Utilities Summary" section
 in Chapter 1.


 At
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The at utility schedules commands or programs to run on a server at the
 specified time or date.


 Syntax

 at [id] [/delete]

 at time [/every:date[,...] | /next:date[,...]] command

 where

 id
   Is an identification number assigned to a scheduled command.

 time
   Specifies the time when command is to run. It is expressed as
   hours:minutes in 24-hour notation (00:00 [midnight] through 23:59).

 command
   Is the MS OS/2 command, batch program (.CMD file), or LAN Manager command
   to be run. When the command requires a pathname as an argument, use the
   absolute pathname.

 /delete
   Cancels a scheduled command. If id is omitted, all scheduled commands on
   the server are canceled.

 /every:date[,...]
   Runs the command on each specified day(s) of the week or month (for
   example, every Thursday, or the third day of every month). Specify date as
   one or more days of the week (M,T,W,Th,F,S,Su) or one or more days of the
   month (using numbers 1 through 31). Separate multiple date entries with a
   comma. If date is omitted, the current date is assumed.

 /next:date[,...]
   Runs the specified command on the next occurrence of the day (for example,
   next Thursday). Specify date as one or more days of the week
   (M,T,W,Th,F,S,Su) or one or more days of the month (using numbers 1
   through 31). Separate multiple date entries with a comma. If date is
   omitted, the current date is assumed.

 To display a list of scheduled commands, type at without options.


 Comments

 Use the at utility to run commands at regularly scheduled intervals. The at
 utility requires administrative privilege. Commands scheduled with the at
 utility run as background processes, so no output is displayed on the
 server's screen. To redirect output to a file, use the MS OS/2 redirection
 symbol (>). If you redirect output to a file, enclose the command you are
 scheduling in quotation marks.

 The at utility has two displays. When you use at without options, you see a
 display similar to the following:

   STATUS   ID    Day       Time    Command Line
   _______________________________________________________________

            0    Each F    04:30PM  net send group leads status due
            2    Each M    12:00AM  chkstor > check.fil
            3    Each F    11:59PM  backacc

 When you include the identification number for the command, the display
 provides information for a single entry and is similar to the following:

   Task ID:      3
   Status:       OK
   Schedule:     Each  F
   Time of Day:  11:59PM
   Command:      backacc

 Scheduled commands are stored in the server's LANMAN\LOGS\SCHED.LOG file, so
 scheduled tasks are not lost if you have to restart the server.


 Examples


   a.  To display a list of commands scheduled on the server, type

       at


   b.  To learn more about a command with the identification number 3, type

       at 3


   c.  To schedule a net share command (to get a display of the status of the
       server's shared resources) to run at 5:00 P.M., and redirect the
       listing to the file SHARE5, type

       at 17:00 "net share >c:\share5"


   d.  To back up a server's hard disk to a tape drive at midnight every five
       days, create a batch program (ARCHIVE.CMD) containing the backup
       commands. Then schedule the batch program to run by typing

       at 00:00 /every:5,10,15,20,25,30 archive


   e.  To back up the user accounts database every weeknight at 10:00 P.M.,
       type

       at 22:00 /every:m,t,w,th,f backacc c:\lanman\accounts\net.acc


   f.  To cancel all commands scheduled on a server, clear the at schedule
       file by typing

       at /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Commands used in examples         Backacc; Chapter 2, "LAN Manager
                                   Commands," Net Share; MSOS/2 manual(s)


 Backacc
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The backacc utility backs up the permissions for high-performance file
 system 386 (HPFS386) volumes, and backs up the NET.ACC and NET.AUD files.


 Syntax

 backacc [[drive:]pathname [/f:[drive:]target] [/a] [/s]]

 where

 drive:
   Is the drive letter for the directory.

 pathname
   Is the directory or file whose permissions are to be backed up. If
   pathname is omitted, only the NET.ACC and NET.AUD files are backed up.
   This is useful if backing up a file allocation table (FAT) volume.

 /f:target
   Is a target file to store the access control lists. If target is not an
   absolute pathname, the default directory is the current working directory.
   If target is not specified, the target is LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\ACLBAKd.ACL,
   where d is the drive letter of the volume being backed up.

 /a
   Appends access permissions to an existing backup file.

 /s
   Is valid only if pathname is a directory. Then it recursively backs up
   permissions for all subdirectories and files of pathname.


 Comments

 Use the backacc utility to back up LAN Manager permissions, audit
 information, and user account information associated with them on a server
 with user-level security. The backacc and restacc utilities complement
 operating system backup utilities by backing up and restoring special files
 and HPFS386 file permissions.

 Besides backing up permissions for HPFS386 files and directories, backacc
 copies the user accounts database, NET.ACC, and the auditing file, NET.AUD
 (the default directory for NET.ACC is LANMAN\ACCOUNTS; the default directory
 for NET.AUD is LANMAN\LOGS). While LAN Manager is running, it keeps these
 files open, and most backup programs do not copy open files.

 For HPFS386 volumes, the backacc utility extracts permissions for files and
 directories and stores them in the ACLBAKd.ACL user account or in a file
 specified by /f:target.

 The backacc utility backs up the user accounts database and audit trail as
 follows:


   ş   NET.ACC is copied to NETACC.BKP.

   ş   NET.AUD is copied to NETAUD.BKP.


 The .BKP files can be backed up and restored with other backup and restore
 utilities. To restore these files, ensure that LAN Manager is not running,
 and use the MS OS/2 copy command to copy the .BKP files to the original
 filename.

 When files are deleted or directories are removed, the associated
 permissions remain (for resources other than HPFS386 resources). The backacc
 utility also removes outdated user account information such as permissions
 in the NET.ACC file for resources that no longer exist.

 Use the backacc utility with complementary utilities in the following order:



   ş   Run the LAN Manager backacc utility.

   ş   Run a standard backup utility.

   ş   Run a standard restore utility.

   ş   Run the LAN Manager restacc utility.



 Example

 To recursively back up the directories and files on the server's HPFS386 C
 drive, and back up the associated permissions, user accounts, and audit
 information to another server on the network (designated as E:), type

   backacc c:\ /s
   backacc c:\ e:\bakdir /s

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Backing up disks                  Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 15

 Restoring HPFS386 permissions     Restacc

 Setting user account permissions  Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
                                   Net Access


 Cache
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The cache utility sets up file system caching for high-performance file
 system 386 (HPFS386) volumes.


 Syntax

   cache [/bufferidle:[drive:]time]
   [/lazy:[drive:]{on | off}] [/maxage:[drive:]time]
   [/options[drive:]] [/stats:[clear | dynamic]]

 where

 /bufferidle:[drive:]time

   Sets the minimum number of milliseconds a cache block must be idle before
   its contents can be written to disk. The range is 0-500000; the default is
   500 milliseconds. A value between 100 and 1000 milliseconds is suggested.
   This option applies only if lazy writes are enabled.

 /lazy:[drive:]{on | off}
   Enables or disables lazy writes. If no drive is specified, the action
   applies to all HPFS386 partitions. If you don't specify the /lazy option
   when you start the cache, lazy writes are disabled. If you specify the
   /lazy option with no values, lazy writes are enabled for all HPFS386
   partitions.

 /maxage:[drive:]time
   Sets the maximum number of milliseconds a dirty cache block can be in
   memory before its contents are written to disk. Higher values improve
   system performance. The range is 0-1000000; the default is 5000
   milliseconds. A value between 1000 and 20000 milliseconds is suggested.
   This option applies only if lazy writes are enabled.

 /options[drive:]
   Displays cache configuration options. The size of the cache and the value
   of /lazy are displayed. If lazy writes are enabled, the values of
   /bufferidle and /maxage are also displayed.

 /stats:[clear | dynamic]
   Displays cache statistics. Specifying the /stats option with no value
   displays the current statistics. The clear value clears the statistics,
   resetting all values to zero. The dynamic value causes the statistics
   display to remain on the screen and be updated approximately once per
   second (if output has been redirected, the dynamic option is ignored). To
   stop the process that refreshes the dynamic display of cache statistics,
   press CTRL+C.


 Comments

 Use the cache utility to start file caching and to set cache options for
 HPFS386 volumes. When LAN Manager is installed on a 386 server, the Setup
 program adds a line to the CONFIG.SYS file to start the cache automatically
 when the computer starts.

 With file caching, data is read from and written to the disk through the
 cache to satisfy future read requests and to speed write operations. When
 data is read from the disk, it is also stored in the cache; subsequent
 requests for the same data can be fulfilled from the cache, saving the time
 necessary for another disk read.

 Enabling lazy writes makes write operations occur more efficiently than on
 file systems that use only synchronous writes. When a write request is
 received, the data is copied into the cache instead of being written
 immediately to the disk. The data is written to disk later as a background
 activity, when the disk is idle. This process optimizes the server's
 response time for all requesting processes.

 The /stats option returns a display similar to the following:

   Cache Statistics

   Read Requests:                719    Disk Reads:          28
   Cache Hit Rate (Reads):        96%   Cache Reads:        691

   Write Requests:                46    Disk Writes:          8
   Cache Hit Rate (Writes):       82%   Lazy Writes:         38

   Hot Fixes:           0

 Read Requests is the total number of read requests received by the server
 since the statistics were last cleared. Disk Reads shows how many of those
 requests required disk access, while Cache Reads shows how many of the read
 requests were fulfilled by the cache. The Cache Hit Rate (Reads) shows the
 percentage of total read requests fulfilled by the cache.

 Write Requests is the total number of write requests received by the server
 since the statistics were last cleared. Disk Writes shows how many of those
 requests required immediate disk access, while Lazy Writes shows how many of
 the write requests performed as lazy writes. The Cache Hit Rate (Writes)
 shows the percentage of total write requests performed as lazy writes.

 Hot Fixes shows the number of times the server detected a bad disk sector
 and rerouted incoming data to a good disk sector.

 The more write and read requests fulfilled by the cache, the better the
 system performance. Increasing the size of the cache improves I/O
 performance, but decreases the amount of memory available for other tasks.
 To adjust the size of the cache, modify the value of the /c option of the
 ifs line in the CONFIG.SYS file.

 The /bufferidle and /maxage options apply only when lazy writes are enabled,
 but affect the performance of both disk reads and disk writes. The values of
 these options determine trade-offs between performance and data integrity;
 higher values often improve performance, but increase the chance that a
 system failure may occur while new data is in the cache but not yet written
 to the disk.

 On servers where small blocks of data are often written and rewritten to the
 disk, increasing the /bufferidle and /maxage values (causing those small
 blocks of data to remain in the cache longer) improves performance. On
 servers where larger blocks of data are written to the disk and write
 requests happen less frequently, lower values of /bufferidle and /maxage are
 better. The value for /maxage takes precedence over the value of
 /bufferidle; when a block containing new data has been in the cache for
 /maxage milliseconds, it is written to the disk regardless of the value of
 /bufferidle. To ensure the effectiveness of lazy writes, do not give /maxage
 a value equal to or lower than the value of /bufferidle.

 Note that when data is written from the cache to the disk for any reason
 (including reaching the /maxage limit), the data is not automatically
 cleared from the cache. Data is cleared from the cache only when it needs to
 be replaced by different data.


 Examples


   a.  To have the file caching system start when the computer starts (with
       lazy writes enabled), the Setup program adds a line to the CONFIG.SYS
       file of a 386 server. The line is similar to the following:

       run=lanman\netprog\cache.exe /lazy:on


   b.  To change the value of the /bufferidle option to 1000, type

       cache /bufferidle:1000



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Securing server resources on      Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 servers with HPFS386 boot         Guide, Chapters 3 and 4
 volumes

 Backing up the accounts database  Backacc

 Scheduling commands               At


 Chkstor
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The chkstor utility checks the amount of storage used for home directories
 on a server.


 Syntax

 chkstor [\\computername | /domain[:name]] [name[ ...]] [/alerts:{yes | no}]


 where

 \\computername
   Specifies which server's storage is to be checked.

 name[ ...]
   Limits storage checking to the specified users and group members. Separate
   multiple name entries with a space. If both a username and a groupname for
   a group to which that user belongs are supplied, LAN Manager reports the
   use of that user's home directory only once.

 /domain[:name]
   Supplies a domain name in which to run the utility. If no name is
   specified, the utility runs in the workstation domain.

 /alerts:{yes | no}
   Set to yes, generates an alert for each user account that exceeds the
   storage limit. These alerts are sent to administrators listed in the
   database and to the user involved. Set to no, alerts are not sent. The
   default is yes.

 To display a report of used disk space for the local server, type chkstor
 without options.


 Comments

 Use the chkstor utility to make sure the server has adequate disk space.
 This utility compares the disk space specified for users' home directories
 with disk space in use. It reports totals for the server or the disk space
 in use for specified home directories. For each home directory on the
 server, LAN Manager reports the username, the disk space allocated, the disk
 space used, and the path.

 With the /alerts option, the alert message has the following format:

   User Johnsw has exceeded maximum storage limits on \\adminstr
    Maximum storage allowed: 512. Storage used: 640

 This utility is available to administrators and to users with account
 operator privilege. Run chkstor at regular intervals using the at utility to
 get a consistent notice of how much disk space is being used by the home
 directories on a server.


 Examples


   a.  To store a current chkstor report for the local server by redirecting
       the utility's output to the DAILY file (in the REPORT\STORAGE
       directory) on drive C, type

       chkstor >c:\report\storage\daily


   b.  To monitor disk use on the remote server \\LOGONS each Sunday morning
       at 11:59, sending the output of the chkstor utility to the CHECKX.STR
       file in the LANMAN\LOGS directory, type

       at 11:59 /every:Su "chkstor \\logons >\lanman\logs\checkx.str"



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Scheduling commands               At

 Sharing home directories on a     Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
 server                            Net Access, Net Share, and Net User

 Listing alertnames                Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
                                   Net Start Server


 Errpopup
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The errpopup utility executes a program and displays any error messages from
 the program in a popup window.


 Syntax

 errpopup program [options]

 where

 program
   Is the name of the executable program to run. Supply the pathname for the
   program if the directory is not already listed with the MS OS/2 path
   command.

 options
   Are one or more arguments (or options) passed to program.


 Comments

 Use the errpopup utility with detached programs to detect errors that occur
 when running the program. A detached program is a program that is run from
 the CONFIG.SYS program run entries, or started with the MS OS/2 detach
 command.

 The errpopup utility executes the program, passing all the arguments (if
 any) to the program. If a program terminates incorrectly (the exit code is
 not zero), errpopup displays the data from the program. The data is assumed
 to be an error report.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The errpopup utility does not depend on the Netpopup service. The errpopup
 messages pop up even if the Netpopup service is not started. The errpopup
 messages are not written to the LAN Manager error log.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The popup display has the following format:

   An error occurred while executing this command:
   [command]
   Program [program name] terminated with an exit code of [number].
   The output of [program] was:

   [Program output is displayed.]

 The popup message is displayed for one minute. To remove the message, press
 ESC.

 For errpopup to capture output from the program, the program must open the
 console directly, and use STDOUT and STDERR for output.


 Examples


   a.  To include errpopup in the CONFIG.SYS file, start the server, and
       limit auditing to logon, place the following command line in the
       CONFIG.SYS file:

       run = errpopup net start server /auditing:logon


   b.  To run the errpopup utility with the MS OS/2 detach and chkdsk
       commands, and use the /f option to correct any disk errors, type

       detach errpopup chkdsk /f:2



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Using MSOS/2 commands             MSOS/2 manual(s)


 Ftadmin
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The ftadmin utility starts the fault-tolerance system, which is a
 full-screen MS OS/2 application that runs in a Presentation Manager window.



 Syntax

 ftadmin [\\computername] [/mono]

 where

 \\computername
   Specifies the computer on which the fault-tolerance system features are to
   be performed.

 /mono
   Improves the screen display for some computer screens. Try the command
   with and without /mono to determine which display you prefer.


 Comments

 Use the ftadmin utility to


   ş   Configure some features of the fault-tolerance disk system without
       running the ftsetup utility

   ş   Run mirror integrity checks

   ş   View and correct disk faults


 LAN Manager does not have to be running to use the ftadmin utility on your
 server. If you don't have the Workstation or Server service started, you can
 only monitor errors on your computer and on other computers on the network.
 If you are using a computer with the high-performance file system (HPFS),
 you can monitor and correct errors for other computers on the network.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 The fault-tolerance system        Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 15

 Other fault-tolerance utilities   Ftmonit and Ftsetup


 Ftmonit
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The ftmonit utility controls the fault-tolerance system's error-monitoring
 feature.


 Syntax

 ftmonit [/alert:{yes | no}] [/compare:{yes | no}] [/quiet:{yes | no}]
 [/clear:{yes | no}]

 where

 /alert:{yes | no}
   Determines whether to send disk-error alerts to usernames in the
   alertnames list in the LANMAN.INI file's [server] section. The default is
   yes.

 /compare:{yes | no}
   Determines whether to do a low-confidence comparison of mirrored drives
   when the computer starts. The default is yes.

 /quiet:{yes | no}
   Specifies whether to display a status message whenever the computer is
   restarted. A yes value suppresses the display. The default is no.

 /clear:{yes | no}
   Set to yes, resets all statistics to zero. The default is no.


 Comments

 Use the ftmonit utility to control the ftsetup utility. The ftsetup utility
 inserts an ftmonit command in the CONFIG.SYS file when you install the
 fault-tolerance system. If drive mirroring or duplexing is in effect, start
 ftmonit with run=ftmonit in the CONFIG.SYS file to ensure correct system
 operation.

 If an error is detected during a confidence check of mirrored or duplexed
 drives, ftmonit logs an error and sends an alert. If an error occurs when
 the primary partition is read, use the ftadmin utility to correct the
 problem.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 The fault-tolerance system        Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 15

 Other fault-tolerance utilities   Ftadmin and Ftsetup


 Ftsetup
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The ftsetup utility installs the fault-tolerance system, and prompts for
 information needed to configure drive mirroring and drive duplexing.


 Syntax

 ftsetup


 Comments

 Use the ftsetup utility to install the fault-tolerance system or configure
 drive mirroring or duplexing and then restart the system. When you restart,
 ftsetup either creates or modifies the STARTUP.CMD file. See the Microsoft
 LAN Manager Installation Guide for a complete description of the ftsetup
 utility.

 Any logical drive, other than the boot volume, can be mirrored as long as
 there is a second hard disk in the system, and the system is running the
 high-performance file system (HPFS).

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 The fault-tolerance system        Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 15

 Other fault-tolerance utilities   Ftadmin and Ftmonit


 Logoff
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The logoff utility logs a username off from a 386 server with local
 security, or logs a username off from the network.


 Syntax

 logoff


 Comments

 Use the logoff utility to secure a server with local security after
 finishing tasks requiring logon. The logoff utility works the same as net
 logoff if the Workstation service is running. If the Workstation service is
 not running, use the logon and logoff utilities to log on to and off from a
 server.


 Example

 To log off from a server with local security, type

   logoff

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Local security                    Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapters 3 and 4

 Setting up local security         SECURESH.EXE

 Local logon                       Logon

 Logging on to and off from the    Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
 network                           Net Logon and Net Logoff


 Logon
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The logon utility logs a username on at a 386 server with local security,
 but not on to the network.


 Syntax

 logon [username [password | *]]

 where

 username
   Is the user account username.

 password
   Is a password.

 *
   Produces a prompt for the password. The password will not be displayed
   when you type it.

 To get a prompt for the username and password, type logon without options.


 Comments

 Use the logon utility to log on at a server with local security without
 starting the network. This enables you to access local resources when the
 network cannot be started.

 At installation, a default administrator's account is created. The username
 for this account is admin, and the password is password.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 This command is not available on 286 servers, on servers with share-level
 security, or on servers with user-level security but not local security.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Example

 To perform administrative operations at a server without logging on to the
 network, and to receive a prompt for the password, type

   logon admin *

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Local security                    Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapters 3 and 4

 Running privileged commands       Priv

 Securing the file system          SECURESH.EXE

 Logging on to and off from the    Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
 network                           Net Logoff and Net Logon


 Makeimg
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The makeimg utility packages all of the system programs on a floppy disk
 into an image file.


 Syntax

 makeimg [drive:] filename[.def]

 where

 drive:
   Is the drive letter where a disk formatted with the format /s command can
   be found. If the drive letter is omitted, A: is assumed.

 filename
   Is the name of the definition file to be used. The image file that is
   created has the same base filename, but with a .IMG extension.

 .def
   Is an extension for the definition filename. If an extension is not
   specified, .DEF is assumed.


 Comments

 Use the makeimg utility to create an image file that provides all of the
 programs needed to start an MS-DOS computer. These programs include two
 hidden programs, as well as AUTOEXEC.BAT, CONFIG.SYS, and COMMAND.COM. The
 two hidden files are placed on the disk (along with COMMAND.COM) when you
 format with the /s option. Format the disk with MS-DOS version 4.01, and
 then run the makeimg utility. This image file is used as a startup drive for
 MS-DOS workstations being booted by the Remoteboot service.

 The makeimg utility uses a definition file (with a .DEF extension) in the
 LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory that has all the information necessary to copy the
 required files from the hard disk to a system disk in drive A. After the
 files are copied to the disk, the utility builds the image and stores it in
 LANMAN\RPL\DOS.

 To run this utility, your current directory must be LANMAN\RPL\DOS.


 Examples


   a.  To initially format the disk, start MS-DOS 4.01, then insert a blank
       disk in drive A, and type

       format a: /s


   b.  To create an image file named DOS401, change to the LANMAN\RPL\DOS
       directory. Insert the MS-DOS version 4.01 system disk into drive A.
       Then, to run the makeimg utility and store the image in the
       LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory, type

       makeimg dos401


       The image file is automatically named DOS401.IMG.

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Setting up remote boot            Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 14; Microsoft LAN Manager
                                   Installation Guide

 Other remote boot utilities       Rpldsabl and Rplenabl

 Starting the Remoteboot service   Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
                                   Net Start Remoteboot




 Portacc
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The portacc utility converts a LAN Manager 1.x user accounts database to a
 LAN Manager 2.0 user accounts database. It also preserves permissions
 established for server resources.


 Syntax

 portacc pathname

 where

 pathname
   Is the pathname of the LAN Manager 1.x NET.ACC file, saved before
   upgrading the LAN Manager software.


 Comments

 Use the portacc utility to convert a LAN Manager 1.x user accounts database
 and the permissions for server resources when upgrading the server to LAN
 Manager 2.0. Use portacc before adding user accounts or groups to the
 upgraded 2.0 server.

 The portacc utility reads the LAN Manager 1.x NET.ACC file, which holds user
 account information and permissions for server resources. It then modifies
 the LAN Manager 2.0 NET.ACC file to add the old user accounts and groups. If
 an account or group already exists in the 2.0 NET.ACC file, portacc does not
 overwrite it or modify it. The 1.x account or group is discarded. The 2.0
 account is not included as a member of any converted 1.0 groups; converted
 1.0 groups contain only converted 1.0 accounts as members.

 The special groups users, admins, guests, servers, accountops, and local are
 not converted by portacc.

 Under LAN Manager 1.x, permissions for server resources are stored in the
 NET.ACC file. The portacc utility writes permissions to the appropriate
 locations for LAN Manager 2.0 as follows:


   ş   Permissions for printer queues, communication-device queues, and named
       pipes are in the NET.ACC file.

   ş   Directory and file permissions for file access table (FAT) partitions
       are in the NET.ACC file.

   ş   Directory and file permissions for high-performance file system (HPFS)
       partitions, converted by LAN Manager 2.0 to HPFS386 partitions, are in
       the file system itself.


 For complete instructions about using the portacc utility, see the Microsoft
 LAN Manager Installation Guide.


 Example

 To convert a LAN Manager 1.x NET.ACC file on a disk in drive A, type

   portacc a:\net.acc

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting resource permissions      Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
                                   Net Access

 Creating or changing user         Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
 accounts                          Net User

 Converting a LAN Manager 1.x      Microsoft LAN Manager Installation Guide
 user accounts database




 Priv
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The priv utility ensures that a background process started by an
 administrator on a 386 server with local security remains privileged after
 the administrator logs off.


 Syntax

 priv command [values]

 where

 command
   Is a .EXE, .COM, or .CMD file in the current path or an internal MS OS/2
   command.

 values
   Are options or arguments of the command being run.


 Comments

 Use the priv utility to start a background process as a privileged process.
 A privileged process is a background process (running on a server with local
 security) that has the equivalent of administrative privilege. A privileged
 process can access all files on the server for as long as it runs, no matter
 who logs on or off locally at the server.

 When you use priv to start a privileged process, any processes started by
 that process are also privileged.

 LAN Manager services are background processes, but using priv with a net
 start command is unnecessary because net start commands, when typed by an
 administrator, automatically start services as privileged processes.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Putting commands in the MS OS/2 batch program PRIVINIT.CMD executes
 processes at system initialization time with the same effect as prefixing
 the command with priv. Putting PRIVINIT.CMD on a high-performance file
 system 386 (HPFS386) volume and protecting the file with local security
 prevents unauthorized processes from being started in it.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Example

 To sort a file into alphabetical order by running the MS OS/2 sort command
 as a privileged background process, type

   detach priv sort < source.fil > dest.fil

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up local security on a    Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 386 server                        Guide, Chapters 3 and 4

 Logging on to and off from a 386  Logon and Logoff
 server with local security

 detach                            MS OS/2 manual(s)


 Restacc
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The restacc utility restores the permissions for high-performance file
 system 386 (HPFS386) volumes that have been stored with the backacc utility.



 Syntax

 restacc [drive:]pathname [[drive:]newname] [/f:[drive:]source] [/s]

 where

 drive:
   Is a drive letter.

 pathname
   Specifies the directory or file for which permissions are to be restored.

 newname
   Is a new file or directory to receive permissions from a file that was
   backed up with the backacc utility. The existing permissions on newname
   (if any) are replaced with the restored permissions.
  If pathname contains wildcard characters, then newname must be a directory.

 /f:source
   Specifies the source file used to restore permissions. If source is
   omitted, LAN Manager uses LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\ACLBAKd.ACL, where d is the
   drive letter of the volume being backed up.

 /s
   Is used with pathname only. It restores permissions for all subdirectories
   of the specified directory.


 Comments

 Use the restacc utility when you restore a disk, or parts of it, with the
 information saved with the backacc utility and a standard backup utility.
 When a file is restored on an HPFS386 volume by a utility that does not
 recognize the method of storing permissions used by HPFS386, the file is
 given default permissions. The restacc utility extracts the permissions that
 the backacc utility stored in a target file and applies the permissions to
 the individual files.

 The default name for the backacc target file is ACLBAKd.ACL, where d is the
 drive letter of the drive that was backed up. Make sure this file is backed
 up with a standard backup utility and restored to the LANMAN\ACCOUNTS
 directory with a standard restore utility.

 Use the restacc utility with complementary utilities in the following order:



   ş   Run the LAN Manager backacc utility.

   ş   Run a standard backup utility.

   ş   Run a standard restore utility.

   ş   Run the LAN Manager restacc utility.



 Examples


   a.  To recursively restore subdirectories and files to the new C: drive,
       and restore the permissions, type

       restore e:\bakdir c:\ /s
             restacc c:\ /s


   b.  To assign permissions that were backed up on the file CAL.89 (with the
       backacc utility) to a new file named CAL.90, type

       restacc cal.89 cal.90



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Safeguarding the server           Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 15

 Backing up permissions and open   Backacc
 LAN Manager files

 Setting user account permissions  Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
                                   Net Access


 Rpldsabl
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The rpldsabl utility disables the Remoteboot service at a workstation that
 has a hard disk.


 Syntax

 rpldsabl


 Comments

 Use the rpldsabl utility at a workstation that is no longer going to be
 started remotely. After running the rpldsabl utility, the workstation boots
 from its own hard disk instead of from a server running the Remoteboot
 service.


 Examples


   a.  To boot MS-DOS from the workstation instead of from a server running
       the Remoteboot service, put an MS-DOS operating system disk that
       contains the RPLDSABL.EXE file in drive A, boot the workstation, and
       type

       rpldsabl


       NOTE  This utility is located in the LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory.

   b.  To boot the workstation from its hard disk, remove the disk from drive
       A and press

       CTRL+ALT+DEL



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up remote boot            Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 14

 Other remote boot utilities       Makeimg and Rplenabl

 Starting the Remoteboot service   Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
                                   Net Start Remoteboot


 Rplenabl
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The rplenabl utility enables the Remoteboot service at a workstation that
 has a hard disk.


 Syntax

 rplenabl


 Comments

 Use the rplenabl utility to prepare a workstation that has a hard disk for
 remote boot. This utility configures the hard disk so the workstation can be
 started from a server that is running the Remoteboot service. This does not
 prevent access to the hard disk after the workstation is booted remotely.


 Examples


   a.  To prepare a workstation with a hard disk to boot from a server
       running the Remoteboot service, boot the workstation, put an MS-DOS
       disk containing the RPLENABL.EXE file into drive A, and type

       rplenabl


       NOTE  This utility is located in the LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory.

   b.  To boot from the server with the necessary Remoteboot service files
       and directories, press

       CTRL+ALT+DEL



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting up remote boot            Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide, Chapter 14

 Other remote boot utilities       Makeimg and Rpldsabl

 Starting the Remoteboot service   Chapter 2, "LAN Manager Commands,"
                                   Net Start Remoteboot


 SECURESH.EXE
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The SECURESH.EXE program implements local security on the high-performance
 file system 386 (HPFS386) partitions of a 386 server with user-level
 security. This program is started from the CONFIG.SYS file.


 Syntax

 protshell=SECURESH.EXE [/n] [/f:pathname] ShellCmd

 where

 ShellCmd
   Is the shell program and the shell program arguments.

 protshell
   Is an MS OS/2 entry for the configuration file. It specifies a
   protect-mode user shell.

 /n
   Disables local security mode, but still runs the PRIVINIT.CMD file (or the
   file specified by the /f option). This option is provided so that local
   security can be turned off temporarily without removing SECURESH.EXE from
   the CONFIG.SYS file.

 /f:pathname
   Specifies a batch file of commands to execute in privileged mode (not
   subject to access permissions). The default (if /f:pathname is not used)
   is C:\PRIVINIT.CMD. Commands in this file have privileged execution at
   system initialization time, and are executed synchronously. To start
   background processes from this file, use the MS OS/2 detach command.


 Comments

 When local security is installed on a 386 server, the Setup program adds
 SECURESH.EXE to the protshell line of the system configuration file. It is
 placed before the user-shell commands of the protshell line. SECURESH.EXE
 implements local security on the server, which extends the file access
 restrictions of user-level security to apply to users working locally at the
 server.

 The SECURESH.EXE program performs the following actions:


   ş   Provides the securesh process privileged status and starts local
       security restrictions (unless you specify the /n option).

   ş   Starts the user accounts system (opening the NET.ACC file). If the
       NET.ACC file is missing or corrupt, it is replaced with the NETACC.BKP
       file. To make sure the NETACC.BKP file is available and current,
       schedule the backacc utility to run regularly using the at utility.

   ş   Displays the following sign-on message:

       LAN Manager local security has started.

             Press ESC to log on now, or press ENTER to start the computer
 with
             no one logged on.


       If you press ESC, a logon prompt appears, allowing you to log on
       locally at the server. If you press ENTER, or do not press ESC within
       five seconds, the system starts with no user logged on.

   ş   Starts a command interpreter (as specified by COMSPEC, or OS2\CMD.EXE
       if COMSPEC is not set) with the arguments "/c pathname." The pathname
       is the MS OS/2 batch program C:\PRIVINIT.CMD unless another pathname
       is specified with the /f option. Processes started from the
       PRIVINIT.CMD file are privileged processes.

   ş   Executes the user shell (asynchronously) with arguments specified by
       ShellCmd, or C:\OS2\PMSHELL.EXE if no other shell and arguments are
       specified. The user shell and all its descendants are subject to the
       access restrictions provided by local security.


 The optional initialization-time logon ensures that the user is able to log
 on at the server regardless of the (possibly incorrect) permission settings
 on CONFIG.SYS, LOGON.EXE, and other system files, but still allows
 unattended startup of a correctly configured system. If a user chooses to
 log on at this time, the system initializes using the permissions and
 privilege of the user.

 Normally the system boots without a user logged on, which allows the system
 access to files for which the group local has been assigned access
 permission. If a file which is required to start the shell or to allow
 normal operation does not have the correct permissions, then the system
 could fail to initiate or could not be functional when it does.

 User accounts with administrative privilege have unrestricted access to all
 files. Logging on at the server at the SECURESH.EXE logon prompt with a
 username that has administrative privilege allows the system to boot even
 when permissions are not correct. After logging on at the server, you can
 correct the permissions.

 Omitting SECURESH.EXE from the protshell line in CONFIG.SYS means that the
 file system is not secured. Therefore, set permissions on CONFIG.SYS and
 PRIVINIT.CMD to prevent users from removing SECURESH.EXE from the file or
 adding or changing commands in PRIVINIT.CMD.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Local security is not available for 286 servers.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Examples


   a.  When local security is installed, the protshell line in the CONFIG.SYS
       file is changed to be similar to the following:

       protshell=c:\lanman\netprog\securesh.exe c:\os2\pmshell.exe
                       c:\os2\cmd.exe


   b.  To have C:\MYFILE.CMD used as the batch file of commands executed as
       privileged processes when the system starts (instead of PRIVINIT.CMD),
       change the protshell line of CONFIG.SYS to be similar to the
       following:

       protshell=c:\lanman\netprog\securesh.exe /f:c:\myfile.cmd
                       c:\os2\pmshell.exe c:\os2\cmd.exe


   c.  To have the Server service start automatically as a privileged process
       when a server with local security is started, include the following
       command in the PRIVINIT.CMD file:

       net start server



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting local permissions and     Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 local group permissions           Guide, Chapters 3 and 4

 Other local security commands     Logoff, Logon, and Priv






 Appendix A  The LANMAN Directory
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This appendix discusses the files that make up the LAN Manager software.
 Specifically, it describes the LANMAN directory and its subdirectories. This
 directory contains the LAN Manager software and is usually found in the
 C:\LANMAN directory of your hard disk.

 The contents in the LANMAN directory are different for a server, for an MS
 OS/2 workstation, and for an MS-DOS workstation running either LAN Manager
 Enhanced or Basic. This appendix describes the directory contents for each
 version.


 What the LANMAN Directory Contains

 When you install the LAN Manager software, the LANMAN directory is created
 on the hard disk. During the installation procedure, you can specify a
 different LAN Manager directory pathname.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If your computer already works on the LAN Manager network but you don't know
 where the LAN Manager software is on the hard disk, type path at the MS OS/2
 or MS-DOS prompt. One directory on your computer's search path will be
 called NETPROG. The pathname ending with the NETPROG directory is the
 pathname of the directory containing the LAN Manager software.  If you are
 using LAN Manager Basic on a computer with MS-DOS, the pathname ending with
 the BASIC directory is the pathname of the directory containing the LAN
 Manager Basic software.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 LANMAN Server Directory

 The LANMAN directory for a server includes the following subdirectories and
 files:

 ACCOUNTS
   Directory for user accounts and permissions database.

 DOCUPDAT
   Directory for changes to the LAN Manager documentation set.

 DRIVERS
   Directory for device drivers and network information files for network
   adapter cards.

 LANMAN.INI
   File used to initialize LAN Manager.

 LOGS
   Directory for log files.

 NETLIB
   Directory for LAN Manager dynamic link libraries.

 NETPROG
   Directory for LAN Manager services, programs, and device drivers.

 PRIVINIT.CMD
   File for system commands that should be run as privileged processes. This
   is only displayed if you install local security on a server with
   high-performance file system 386 (HPFS386).

 PROFILES
   Directory for profiles.

 REPL
   Directory for the tools needed to replicate programs, files, and
   directories on different servers.

 RPL
   Directory for remote boot files.

 RPLUSER
   Directory for remote boot work files.

 SERVICES
   Directory for LAN Manager services.

 SETUP.EXE
   File for the LAN Manager Setup program.

 SETUP.INF
   File that contains information required by the Setup program.

 SETUP.INI
   File that contains the history of configuration settings for the Setup
   program. You can't edit this file.

 The remainder of this section discusses the contents of the LANMAN directory
 for a server.


 The LANMAN\ACCOUNTS Directory

 The LANMAN\ACCOUNTS directory contains information about the user accounts
 and access permissions for a server with user-level security.

 If you have installed a server with user-level security, this directory
 contains a NET.ACC file. The NET.ACC file contains the user accounts
 database for a server with user-level security.

 In addition, the LANMAN\ACCOUNTS directory has a subdirectory for the users'
 home directories. The default name of this subdirectory is USERDIRS. This
 name can be changed, but it is best to do so before creating user accounts.
 The name is specified by the userpath entry in the [server] section of the
 LANMAN.INI file. The USERDIRS directory contains the subdirectory SCRIPTS,
 which contains two logon script files for users of LAN Manager 1.0
 workstations.


 The LANMAN\DOCUPDAT Directory

 The LANMAN\DOCUPDAT directory contains files with information about changes
 made to the LAN Manager manual(s) that didn't get incorporated at the time
 of publication. The LANMAN\DOCUPDAT directory includes the following files:


 ADMINGID.TXT
   Contains information about changes to the Microsoft LAN Manager
   Administrator's Guide.

 ADMINREF.TXT
   Contains information about changes to the Microsoft LAN Manager
   Administrator's Reference.

 DOC.TXT
   Provides an index to the contents of the files in this directory.

 DOSUSER.TXT
   Contains information about changes to the Microsoft LAN Manager User's
   Guide for MS-DOS.

 INSTALL.TXT
   Contains information about changes to the Microsoft LAN Manager
   Installation Guide.

 NDDG.TXT
   Contains information about changes to the Microsoft LAN Manager Network
   Device Driver Guide.

 OS2USER.TXT
   Contains information about changes to the Microsoft LAN Manager User's
   Guide for MS OS/2.

 QUICKREF.TXT
   Contains information about changes to the quick reference guides.

 RELNOTE.TXT
   Contains release notes for the LAN Manager software.


 The LANMAN\DRIVERS Directory

 The LANMAN\DRIVERS directory holds the network device drivers, network
 information files for network adapter cards, and a device driver for the
 uninterruptible power supply (UPS).

 There are two types of network device drivers: protocol and media access
 control. Protocol drivers work as intermediaries between LAN Manager and
 media access control drivers. Media access control drivers work as
 intermediaries between protocol drivers and the network adapter cards. For
 further information about network device drivers, see the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 The LANMAN\DRIVERS directory contains the following subdirectories and
 files:

 BASEBAND
   Contains media access control drivers for baseband network adapter cards.

 ETHERNET
   Contains media access control drivers for EtherNet(R) network adapter
   cards.

 NIF
   Contains media access control driver network information files (NIF). A
   NIF\README.TXT file describes the structure of NIF files.

 PROTMAN
   Contains the protocol manager files.

 PROTOCOL
   Contains protocol drivers. The PROTOCOL directory contains the
   subdirectories NETBEUI, LOOPBACK, and RPL.

 README.TXT
   Contains changes made to the LANMAN\DRIVERS directory that didn't get
   incorporated at the time of publication.

 TOKENRNG
   Contains media access control drivers for Token-Ring network adapter
   cards.

 UPSDRV.OS2
   Contains the UPS device driver.

 XIF
   Contains protocol driver transport information files (XIF). An
   XIF\README.TXT file describes the structure of XIF files.


 The LANMAN\LOGS Directory

 The LANMAN\LOGS directory contains files for storing network messages and
 information about the usage and function of the server. The LANMAN\LOGS
 directory is empty at installation, but will later contain the following
 files:

 MESSAGES.LOG
   Default message log.

 NET.AUD
   Default audit trail (servers only).

 NET.ERR
   Default error log.

 SCHED.LOG
   Default log for tasks scheduled to run using the at command (servers
   only).


 The LANMAN\NETLIB Directory

 The LANMAN\NETLIB directory contains dynamic link libraries used by LAN
 Manager and applications written to use LAN Manager. The LANMAN\NETLIB
 directory contains the following libraries:

 FT.DLL
   Provides library functions for the fault-tolerance system.

 LMPRINT.QPR
   Provides the default LAN Manager print processor with separator page
   support.

 MAILSLOT.DLL
   Provides mailslot library functions for sending information across the
   network and locally.

 MSHELP.DLL
   Provides library functions for accessing LAN Manager help.

 NB30.DLL
   Provides library functions for NetBIOS 3.0 support.

 NETAPI.DLL
   Provides basic LAN Manager system calls.

 NETOEM.DLL
   Provides OEM-replaceable LAN Manager library functions.

 NETSPOOL.DLL
   Provides compatibility library functions for the LAN Manager spooler.

 PMPRINT.QPR
   Provides the LAN Manager print processor without separator page support.

 PMSPL.DLL
   Provides library functions for the LAN Manager spooler under Microsoft
   Windows(tm) 3.0.

 RPL*.DLL
   Provides remote boot access to OEM-provided library functions that support
   the network adapter card.

 SPL1B.DLL
   Provides compatibility spooler library functions.

 ULAN.DLL
   Provides redirector file system driver (FSD) support.

 For more information about these programming libraries, see the Microsoft
 LAN Manager Programmer's Reference.


 The LANMAN\NETPROG Directory

 The LANMAN\NETPROG directory contains all the basic LAN Manager programs and
 commands. The Setup program adds this directory to your search path when you
 install the LAN Manager software.

 The LANMAN\NETPROG directory contains the following files:

 AT.EXE
   Runs a command at a specified time (servers only).

 BACKACC.EXE
   Backs up the user accounts database and the audit trail.

 CHKSTOR.EXE
   Checks the storage remaining in home directories on a server.

 ERRPOPUP.EXE
   Runs a program and displays error messages in a popup window.

 MAKEIMG.EXE
   Creates an MS-DOS remote boot image file.

 NET.EXE
   Starts the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen and processes LAN
   Manager commands.

 NET.HLP
   Contains help messages for LAN Manager commands.

 NET.MSG
   Contains informational messages for LAN Manager.

 NETxxx.MSG
   Contains foreign language message files. This is only displayed on
   international versions.

 NETADMIN.EXE
   Runs the administrator's version of the LAN Manager Screen. The net
   command uses this file; don't type netadmin as a command.

 NETCONFS.EXE
   Works with Presentation Manager to run the console version of the LAN
   Manager Screen.

 NETCONSL.EXE
   Runs the console version of the LAN Manager Screen (servers only). The net
   command uses this file; don't type netconsl as a command.

 NETCOPY.EXE
   Copies files across the network. The net command uses this file; don't
   type netcopy as a command.

 NETH.MSG
   Contains explanations of LAN Manager error messages; used by the MS OS/2
   helpmsg command.

 NETMOVE.EXE
   Moves files across the network. The net command uses this file; don't type
   netmove as a command.

 NETRUN.EXE
   Runs a command on a remote server. The net command uses this file; don't
   type netrun as a command.

 NETUSER.EXE
   Runs the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen. The net command uses
   this file; don't type netuser as a command.

 NETWKSTA.SYS
   Contains the device driver for the LAN Manager software.

 NIFA.HLP
   Contains help messages for the administrator's version of the LAN Manager
   Screen (net admin uses NIFA.HLP).

 NIFC.HLP
   Contains help messages for the console version of the LAN Manager Screen
   (net console uses NIFC.HLP).

 NIFU.HLP
   Contains help messages for the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen
   (net uses NIFU.HLP).

 PMSPOOL.EXE
   Starts the LAN Manager version of the MS OS/2 Print Manager.

 PMSPOOLH.HLP
   Contains help messages for the LAN Manager Print Manager.

 PORTACC.EXE
   Updates LAN Manager security files from Release 1.0 to Release 2.0 format
   (the Setup program uses PORTACC.EXE).

 RDRHELP.SYS
   Provides MS-DOS compatibility-mode support.

 RESTACC.EXE
   Restores account permissions.

 RPLDLL.MSG
   Contains messages for remote boot library functions.

 SMBTRACE.EXE
   Traces server message blocks (SMB) to the Redirector and from the server.


 LAN Manager Programs and Files That Run on 386 Servers

 CACHE.EXE
   Contains the command to set up file system cache entries for LAN Manager.

 DISKFT.SYS
   Contains the disk driver that detects errors and reports them through
   FTMONIT.EXE.

 DISK02.SYS
   Contains a disk driver with fault tolerance support.

 FTADMIN.EXE
   Contains the command to administer the fault-tolerance system. The
   fault-tolerance system enables you to verify mirrored drives, correct
   errors, and configure fault tolerance.

 FTADMINH.HLP
   Contains help messages for the fault-tolerance system.

 FTMONIT.EXE
   Contains the error monitoring feature for the fault-tolerance system.

 FTSETUP.EXE
   Contains the command to run the installation utility for the
   fault-tolerance system.

 HPFS.386
   Contains the LAN Manager server and file system. This is an executable
   file that is loaded by LAN Manager.

 HPFS386.IFS
   Contains the LAN Manager file system driver (FSD).

 LOGOFF.EXE
   Contains the command used to log off from a LAN Manager server that has
   local security.

 LOGON.EXE
   Contains the command used to log on to a LAN Manager server that has local
   security.

 PRIV.EXE
   Ensures that a privileged background process on a LAN Manager server with
   local security remains privileged after the administrator logs off.

 SECURESH.EXE
   Runs the LAN Manager secure server shell.


 The LANMAN\PROFILES Directory

 The LANMAN\PROFILES directory contains user profiles for different
 configurations. The LANMAN\PROFILES directory contains the following files:


 RPL.PRO
   Provides a profile to set up shared resources for remote boot
   workstations.

 SRVAUTO.PRO
   Provides a profile that can be loaded and saved automatically by the
   Server service.


 The LANMAN\REPL Directory

 The Replicator service uses the LANMAN\REPL directory to let you maintain
 identical sets of files and directories on different servers. The
 LANMAN\REPL directory contains the following subdirectories:

 EXPORT
   Contains master copy subdirectories that are replicated to other computers
   on the network.

 IMPORT
   Contains subdirectories that are replicated from another computer on the
   network operating as an export server. The IMPORT directory contains the
   subdirectory SCRIPTS for users of LAN Manager 2.0 workstations.


 The LANMAN\RPL Directory

 The LANMAN\RPL directory contains remote boot information for MS OS/2 and
 MS-DOS workstations. If replication is enabled, these files and directories
 are replicated. If you want to replicate the RPL directory, move LANMAN\RPL
 to LANMAN\REPL\EXPORT\RPL.

 The LANMAN\RPL directory contains the following subdirectories and files:

 DOS
   Contains MS-DOS image files used for remotely booting MS-DOS, the image
   definition files, and the real-mode network device drivers used to
   remotely boot MS OS/2 and MS-DOS.

 DOS401
   Contains the MS-DOS version 4.01 files, copied from the MS-DOS version
   4.01 install set. You have to create this directory.

 FITS
   Contains file index tables for remotely booted MS OS/2 workstations.

 LANMAN
   Contains LAN Manager software for remote boot MS OS/2 workstations. You
   have to create this directory.

 LANMAN.DOS
   Contains LAN Manager Enhanced software for remote boot MS-DOS
   workstations. You have to create this directory.

 MACHINES
   Contains a directory for each MS OS/2 workstation that contains
   configuration files specific to that workstation.

 OS2
   Contains files necessary to remotely boot MS OS/2.

 *.CNF
   Contains the remote boot block configuration files used to define a remote
   boot block.

 RPL.MAP
   Contains the remote boot definition records.


 The LANMAN\RPLUSER Directory

 The LANMAN\RPLUSER directory contains the workstations' HOME directories.
 The LANMAN\RPLUSER directory contains the subdirectory DEFAULT, which is the
 prototype HOME directory for remote boot computers. DEFAULT should be copied
 to create HOME directories for new remote boot computers.


 The LANMAN\SERVICES Directory

 The LANMAN\SERVICES directory contains the programs that run components
 (services) of the LAN Manager system. These components let you send
 messages, run commands at a server, and spool print jobs.

 These programs can't be run directly. See Chapter 2 in the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Administrator's Guide for information about starting, stopping, and
 controlling services.

 The LANMAN\SERVICES directory contains the following programs:

 ALERTER.EXE
   Sends administrative and user alert messages (servers only).

 MSRV.EXE
   Receives network messages.

 MSRVINIT.EXE
   Starts the MSRV.EXE program.

 NETLOGON.EXE
   Runs the domainwide security service (servers only).

 NETPOPUP.EXE
   Displays messages in a separate window on the screen.

 NETSERVR.EXE
   Runs the Server service (servers only).

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 This program name is NETPSERV.EXE for a workstation running the Peer
 service.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 NETSVINI.EXE
   Starts the NETSERVR.EXE program (full servers only).

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 This program name is NETPSINI.EXE for a workstation running the Peer
 service.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 REPLCLI.EXE
   Provides file replication service.

 REPLICAT.EXE
   Copies files from server to server.

 REPLMAST.EXE
   Provides file replication service.

 RPLSERVR.EXE
   Provides boot service to remote workstations with or without disk drives.

 RUNSERVR.EXE
   Lets servers accept and run commands from other computers; used by the
   Netrun service (servers only).

 RUNSLAVE.EXE
   Lets workstations send commands to run on servers; used by the Netrun
   service.

 TIMESRC.EXE
   Provides a reliable time service; used by the Timesource service.

 UPS.EXE
   Runs the UPS (uninterruptible power supply) service.

 WKSTA.EXE
   Runs the Workstation service.

 WKSTAHLP.EXE
   Provides functions needed by the LAN Manager software.


 LANMAN MS OS/2 Workstation Directory

 The LANMAN directory for an MS OS/2 workstation contains only the files and
 subdirectories needed to run a workstation. If you are running the Peer
 service, there will be additional files and subdirectories in your LANMAN
 directory. These are documented in the "LANMAN Server Directory" section,
 earlier in this appendix.

 The LANMAN directory for an MS OS/2 workstation includes the following
 subdirectories and files:

 DRIVERS
   Directory for device drivers and network information files for network
   adapter cards.

 LANMAN.INI
   File used to initialize LAN Manager.

 LOGS
   Directory for log files.

 NETLIB
   Directory for LAN Manager dynamic link libraries.

 NETPROG
   Directory for LAN Manager services, programs, and device drivers.

 PROFILES
   Directory for profiles.

 SERVICES
   Directory for LAN Manager services.

 SETUP.EXE
   File for the LAN Manager Setup program.

 SETUP.INF
   File that contains information required by the Setup program.

 SETUP.INI
   File that contains the history of configuration settings for the Setup
   program. You can't edit this file.

 The remainder of this section discusses the contents of the LANMAN directory
 for an MS OS/2 workstation.


 The LANMAN\DRIVERS Directory

 The LANMAN\DRIVERS directory holds the network device drivers and network
 information files for network adapter cards.

 There are two types of device drivers: protocol and media access control.
 Protocol drivers work as intermediaries between LAN Manager and media access
 control drivers. Media access control drivers work as intermediaries between
 protocol drivers and the network adapter cards. For further information
 about network device drivers, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device
 Driver Guide.

 The LANMAN\DRIVERS directory contains the following subdirectories:

 BASEBAND
   Contains media access control drivers for baseband network adapter cards.

 ETHERNET
   Contains media access control drivers for EtherNet network adapter cards.

 NIF
   Contains media access control driver network information files (NIF). A
   NIF\README.TXT file describes the structure of NIF files.

 PROTMAN
   Contains the protocol manager files.

 PROTOCOL
   Contains protocol drivers. The PROTOCOL directory contains the
   subdirectories NETBEUI and LOOPBACK.

 README.TXT
   Contains changes made to the LANMAN\DRIVERS directory that didn't get
   incorporated at the time of publication.

 TOKENRNG
   Contains media access control drivers for Token-Ring network adapter
   cards.

 XIF
   Contains protocol driver Transport Information Files (XIF).


 The LANMAN\LOGS Directory

 The LANMAN\LOGS directory contains log files for storing network messages
 and information about the usage and function of the workstation. This
 directory is empty at installation, but will later contain the following
 files:

 MESSAGES.LOG
   Default message log.

 NET.AUD
   Default audit trail (Peer service only).

 NET.ERR
   Default error log.


 The LANMAN\NETLIB Directory

 The LANMAN\NETLIB directory contains dynamic link libraries used by LAN
 Manager and applications written to use LAN Manager. The LANMAN\NETLIB
 directory contains some of the following libraries:

 MAILSLOT.DLL
   Provides mailslot system calls for broadcasting information across the
   network.

 MSHELP.DLL
   Provides library functions for accessing LAN Manager help.

 NB30.DLL
   Provides library functions for NetBIOS 3.0 support.

 NETAPI.DLL
   Provides basic LAN Manager system calls.

 NETOEM.DLL
   Provides OEM-replaceable LAN Manager system calls.

 NETSPOOL.DLL
   Provides system calls for the LAN Manager spooler.

 ULAN.DLL
   Supports the file system driver.

 For more information about these programming libraries, see the Microsoft
 LAN Manager Programmer's Reference.


 The LANMAN\NETPROG Directory

 The LANMAN\NETPROG directory contains all the basic LAN Manager programs and
 commands. The Setup program adds this directory to your search path when you
 install the LAN Manager software.

 The LANMAN\NETPROG directory contains some of the following files:

 ERRPOPUP.EXE
   Runs a program and displays error messages in a popup window.

 NET.EXE
   Starts the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen and processes LAN
   Manager commands.

 NET.HLP
   Contains help messages for LAN Manager commands.

 NET.MSG
   Contains informational messages for LAN Manager.

 NETxxx.MSG
   Contains foreign language message files. This is only displayed on
   international versions.

 NETADMIN.EXE
   Runs the administrator's version of the LAN Manager Screen. The net
   command uses this file; don't type netadmin as a command.

 NETCOPY.EXE
   Copies files across the network. The net command uses this file; don't
   type netcopy as a command.

 NETH.MSG
   Contains explanations of LAN Manager error messages; used by the MS OS/2
   helpmsg command.

 NETMOVE.EXE
   Moves files across the network. The net command uses this file; don't type
   netmove as a command.

 NETRUN.EXE
   Runs a command on a remote server. The net command uses this file; don't
   type netrun as a command.

 NETUSER.EXE
   Runs the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen. The net command uses
   this file; don't type netuser as a command.

 NETWKSTA.SYS
   Contains the device driver for the workstation software.

 NIFA.HLP
   Contains help messages for the administrator's version of the LAN Manager
   Screen (net admin uses NIFA.HLP).

 NIFU.HLP
   Contains help messages for the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen
   (net uses NIFU.HLP).

 RDRHELP.SYS
   Provides MS-DOS compatibility-mode support.

 SMBTRACE.EXE
   Traces server message blocks (SMB) to the workstation and from the server.


 The LANMAN\PROFILES Directory

 The LANMAN\PROFILES directory contains user profiles for different
 configurations. LAN Manager distribution software does not include profiles,
 since they are specific to each computer. This directory, therefore, is
 empty when you install LAN Manager.


 The LANMAN\SERVICES Directory

 The LANMAN\SERVICES directory contains the programs that run components of
 the LAN Manager system other than the Workstation service. The
 LANMAN\SERVICES directory contains some of the following programs:

 MSRV.EXE
   Sends and receives network messages.

 MSRVINIT.EXE
   Starts the MSRV.EXE program.

 NETPOPUP.EXE
   Displays messages in a separate window on the screen.

 NETPSERV.EXE
   Runs the Peer service.

 NETPSINI.EXE
   Starts the NETSERVR.EXE program (Peer service only).

 RUNSLAVE.EXE
   Lets workstations send commands to run on servers; used by the Netrun
   service.

 WKSTA.EXE
   Runs the Workstation service.

 WKSTAHLP.EXE
   Provides functions needed by the LAN Manager software.


 LANMAN.DOS Enhanced Directory

 The LANMAN.DOS Enhanced directory for an MS-DOS workstation includes the
 following subdirectories and files:

 DRIVERS
   Directory for device drivers and network information files for network
   adapter cards.

 LANMAN.INI
   File used to initialize LAN Manager Enhanced.

 LOGS
   Directory for log files. See Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI File."

 NETPROG
   Directory for LAN Manager Enhanced services, programs, and device drivers.


 PROFILES
   Directory for profiles.

 SERVICES
   Directory for LAN Manager Enhanced services.

 SETUP.EXE
   File for the LAN Manager Setup program.

 SETUP.INF
   File that contains information required by the Setup program.

 SETUP.INI
   File that contains the history of configuration settings for the Setup
   program. You can't edit this file.

 The remainder of this section discusses the contents of the LANMAN.DOS
 Enhanced directory for an MS-DOS workstation.


 The LANMAN.DOS\DRIVERS Directory

 The LANMAN.DOS\DRIVERS directory holds the network device drivers, network
 information files for network adapter cards, and a device driver for MS-DOS.


 There are two types of network device drivers: protocol and media access
 control. Protocol drivers work as intermediaries between LAN Manager
 Enhanced and media access control drivers. Media access control drivers work
 as intermediaries between protocol drivers and network adapter cards. For
 further information about network device drivers, see the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 The LANMAN.DOS\DRIVERS directory contains the following subdirectories:

 BASEBAND
   Contains media access control drivers for baseband network adapter cards.

 DOSUTILS
   Contains expanded and extended memory drivers for MS-DOS.

 ETHERNET
   Contains media access control drivers for EtherNet network adapter cards.

 NIF
   Contains media access control driver network information files (NIF). A
   NIF\README.TXT file describes the structure of NIF files.

 PROTMAN
   Contains the protocol manager files.

 PROTOCOL
   Contains protocol drivers. The PROTOCOL directory contains the
   subdirectories NETBEUI and LOOPBACK.

 README.TXT
   Contains changes made to the LANMAN\DRIVERS directory that didn't get
   incorporated at the time of publication

 TOKENRING
   Contains media access control drivers for Token-Ring network adapter
   cards.

 XIF
   Contains protocol driver transport information files (XIF). An
   XIF\README.TXT file describes the structure of NIF files.


   1.  The LANMAN.DOS\LOGS Directory


 The LANMAN.DOS\LOGS directory contains log files for storing network
 messages. The LANMAN.DOS\LOGS directory contains the following file:

 MESSAGES.LOG
   Default message log.


 The LANMAN.DOS\NETPROG Directory

 The LANMAN.DOS\NETPROG directory contains LAN Manager Enhanced files and
 programs. The Setup program adds this directory to your search path when you
 install the LAN Manager Enhanced software.

 LAN Manager Enhanced uses the files in LANMAN.DOS\NETPROG to run the
 workstation and perform tasks. Don't type these files as commands.

 The LANMAN.DOS\NETPROG directory contains the following files:

 CHKNET.EXE
   Tests whether the network is already started.

 LANMAN.DRV
   Provides shell support when using Microsoft Windows 3.0 with LAN Manager
   Enhanced.

 LANMAN.HLP
   Contains help text for shell support when using Microsoft Windows 3.0 with
   LAN Manager Enhanced.

 LANMAN.INI
   Provides initialization for LAN Manager Enhanced. This file is installed
   by the Setup program without application program interface (API) support.

 MINSES.EXE
   Provides the interface between the workstation software and network
   drivers.

 MSNET
   Processes LAN Manager Enhanced commands on a workstation without API
   support.

 NET.EXE
   Starts the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen and processes LAN
   Manager Enhanced commands.

 NET.HLP
   Contains help messages for LAN Manager Enhanced command-line commands.

 NET.MSG
   Contains informational messages for LAN Manager Enhanced.

 NET.PIF
   Provides the program information file (PIF) for NET.EXE.

 NETCOPY.EXE
   Copies files across the network. The net command uses this file; don't
   type netcopy as a command.

 NETMOVE.EXE
   Moves files across the network. The net command uses this file; don't type
   netmove as a command.

 NETAPI.DLL
   Provides basic LAN Manager library functions when using Microsoft Windows
   3.0 with LAN Manager Enhanced.

 NETAPI.EXE
   Provides basic LAN Manager library functions when using Microsoft Windows
   2.0 with LAN Manager Enhanced.

 NETH.MSG
   Contains explanations of LAN Manager Enhanced error messages.

 NETUSER.EXE
   Runs the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen.

 NETWKSTA.EXE
   Starts the workstation software.

 NIFU.HLP
   Contains help messages for the user's version of the LAN Manager Screen.

 OSO001.MSG
   Provides error message text for LAN Manager Enhanced commands.

 PMSPL.EXE
   Provides library functions for the LAN Manager Enhanced spooler under
   Microsoft Windows 2.x.

 PRINTQ.EXE
   Processes print jobs on a workstation without API support.

 PRTSC.EXE
   Flushes the spooler to print a file within an application.

 SETNAME.EXE
   Sets the computername for a workstation without API support.

 USE.EXE
   Establishes connections to shared resources on a workstation without API
   support.

 WINPOPUP.EXE
   Provides a version of NETPOPUP.EXE to use with the Netpopup service when
   using Microsoft Windows 3.0.

 WINPOPUP.PIF
   Provides the program information file for WINPOPUP.EXE.


 The LANMAN.DOS\PROFILES Directory

 The LANMAN.DOS\PROFILES directory contains user profiles for different
 configurations. LAN Manager Enhanced distribution software does not include
 profiles, since they are specific to each computer. This directory,
 therefore, is empty when you install LAN Manager Enhanced.


 The LANMAN.DOS\SERVICES Directory

 The LANMAN.DOS\SERVICES directory contains the programs that run components
 of the LAN Manager Enhanced system other than the Workstation service. The
 LANMAN.DOS\SERVICES directory contains the following programs:

 ENCRYPT.EXE
   Provides encryption of passwords.

 MSRV.EXE
   Sends and receives network messages.

 NETPOPUP.EXE
   Displays messages in a separate window on the screen.


 LANMAN.DOS Basic Directory

 The LANMAN.DOS directory for LAN Manager Basic workstations includes the
 following subdirectories and files:

 BASIC
   Directory for LAN Manager Basic services

 DRIVERS
   Directory for device drivers and network information files for network
   adapter cards. This directory is explained in "The LANMAN.DOS\DRIVERS
   Directory" section, earlier in this appendix.

 SETUP.EXE
   File for the LAN Manager Setup program.

 SETUP.INF
   File that contains information required by the Setup program.

 SETUP.INI
   File that contains the history of configuration settings for the Setup
   program. You can't edit this file.


 The LANMAN.DOS\BASIC Directory

 The LANMAN.DOS\BASIC directory contains LAN Manager Basic programs and
 commands. The Setup program adds this directory to your search path when the
 LAN Manager Basic software is installed.

 LAN Manager Basic uses the files in LANMAN.DOS\BASIC to run the workstation
 and perform tasks. Don't type these files as commands.

 The LANMAN.DOS\BASIC directory contains the following files:

 CHKNET.EXE
   Tests whether the network is already started.

 LANMAN.INI
   Configures the LAN Manager Basic software. See Appendix B, "The LANMAN.INI
   File."

 MINSES.EXE
   Provides the interface between the workstation software and network
   drivers.

 NET.EXE
   Processes LAN Manager Basic commands.

 PRINTQ.EXE
   Processes print jobs.

 PRTSC.EXE
   Flushes the spooler to print a file within an application.

 REDIR.EXE
   Starts the workstation software.

 SETNAME.EXE
   Sets the computername for the workstation.

 USE.EXE
   Establishes connections to shared resources.

 *.HLP
   Contains error message text for LAN Manager Basic commands.








 Appendix B  The LANMAN.INI File
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The LANMAN.INI file is the initialization file for LAN Manager. LAN Manager
 software comes with a default LANMAN.INI file that you modify during setup
 to make your computer unique on the network.

 After your computer is running on the network, you might decide to change
 other values in the LANMAN.INI file to better serve the particular needs of
 your computer or domain. This appendix describes how to change entries in
 the LANMAN.INI file. It introduces each section of the file and notes if the
 section is only for servers. It describes each entry for the section, and
 highlights entries that are different for MS-DOS workstations. The entry
 description includes the range and default for values. The appendix then
 provides some sample LANMAN.INI files and, at the end of the appendix,
 tables that summarize section entries.

 Each time you start a part of the LAN Manager software, the LANMAN.INI file
 is read, and appropriate values are used to configure the computer. Values
 in the LANMAN.INI file that configure LAN Manager services have comparable
 command line options.

 The sections of LANMAN.INI that do not configure services are the
 [netshell], [networks], and [services] sections. The [netshell] section
 includes the username that is displayed when you log on to the network. The
 [networks] section lists the number of networks and points to the network
 device drivers. The [services] section lists the directories for the
 services' software.


 How To Override Values

 The LAN Manager Screen's Config menu commands, and the net start and net
 config command-line commands, have options that do the same thing as entries
 in the LANMAN.INI file. When starting a service, you can override values in
 the LANMAN.INI file by changing corresponding option values of the Config
 menu or the net start command. Values changed using the net config command
 occur immediately, and do not require that you stop and restart the
 associated service. When you override a value in the LANMAN.INI file using
 the Config menu commands, or the net start or net config command, the value
 is changed only for as long as the service is running.

 Chapter 2 in the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide describes how
 to control services using the LAN Manager Screen. Chapter 2, "LAN Manager
 Commands," in this manual describes the net config and net start commands.


 How To Change File Values

 Use a text editor or the Setup program to change values in the LANMAN.INI
 file. Then, for the new values to take effect, restart the computer for
 changes that are not specific to a service. When changes affect a particular
 service, stop and restart the affected LAN Manager service.

 The following entries in the [workstation] section are exceptions that also
 require restarting the computer to take effect:


   ş   maxcmds

   ş   maxthreads



 Why You Change Values

 Consider values for entries in the default LANMAN.INI file to be in the
 following three categories:


   ş   Values you should change You must supply a value for the network
       device driver net1 in the [networks] section, and the name of the
       computer (computername) in the [workstation] section. The only other
       value absolutely required to start the Workstation service is the
       location of the Workstation service software
       (LANMAN\SERVICES\WKSTA.EXE). At installation, the Setup program
       prompts for these values.

   ş   Values you want to change Some examples of entries you might want to
       change include username (in the [netshell] section). This is the
       default name used when a user logs on to the network. The auditing and
       noauditing entries (in the [server] section) can be changed often, as
       you decide the best way to audit resource usage on a server. You also
       might want to change values for entries that require a pathname, or
       change values in the [netlogon] section to fit the needs of your
       primary domain controller.

   ş   Values you rarely or never change The heuristics entries determine how
       information is sent and received over the network. The wrkheuristics
       entry is in the [workstation] section. The srvheuristics entry in the
       [server] section complements wrkheuristics at a server. The values for
       these entries are numbers that control aspects of performance, data
       transfer, and protocols. The default settings are optimum, and
       typically should not be modified because they work on most types of
       network hardware. If you find a performance problem, you can change
       the settings. For example, you do not want read-ahead on a 300-baud
       network line because if the data is not actually used, you sacrifice
       performance. The default value is set to do read-ahead.



 LANMAN.INI File Conventions

 The LANMAN.INI file has the following conventions:

 entry=value
   Each entry starts on a new line. The entry name is followed by an equal
   sign and a value assigned to the entry. A space before and after the equal
   sign is accepted.

 pathname
   When the value for an entry is a pathname, a relative pathname is assumed
   to be relative to the LAN Manager root directory (LANMAN) or an
   appropriate subdirectory of the LAN Manager root directory. See the
   descriptions of individual entries for specific directories for relative
   pathnames. LAN Manager also recognizes absolute pathnames (for example,
   C:\LANMAN) and, for some entries, network paths, also known as universal
   naming convention (UNC) paths (for example, \\SERVERX\SHAREY\DIRZ).

 [section]
   Section titles are enclosed in brackets.

 ;
   Comments start with a semicolon and must be on a separate line.

 0 and null
   If an entry has no value, the software assumes the value is zero for
   entries that require a number and null (empty) for entries that require a
   character string. If LAN Manager displays an error message when the file
   is read, look for blanks instead of values at the entry. Then read the
   description of the entry to determine if zero or null is an acceptable
   value.

 Text in the LANMAN.INI file is converted to uppercase by LAN Manager in
 screen displays. The exception is srvcomment (server comment), which appears
 as typed.


 LANMAN.INI File Sections

 The LANMAN.INI file is divided into sections pertaining to parts of the
 software. This appendix follows the organization of the LANMAN.INI file for
 a server. MS OS/2 workstations have sections that are exactly like those for
 a server, and MS-DOS workstations have the same sections, but not all
 entries are the same. Entries that are specific to an MS-DOS workstation are
 noted with (MS-DOS only). Entries that are not used for MS-DOS are noted
 with (MS OS/2 only). The following list tells which sections are for both
 workstations and servers, and which sections are for servers only:


   ş   [networks] (both)

   ş   [workstation] (both)

   ş   [messenger] (both)

   ş   [netshell] (both)

   ş   [server] (servers only)

   ş   [alerter] (servers only)

   ş   [netrun] (servers only)

   ş   [replicator] (servers and MS-OS/2 workstations)

   ş   [ups] (servers only)

   ş   [netlogon] (servers only)

   ş   [remoteboot] (servers only)

   ş   [services] (both)



 The Networks Section for MS OS/2

 The [networks] section specifies which network(s) the computer can use. LAN
 Manager enables a computer to have multiple NetBIOS drivers. LAN Manager
 checks values in this section only when the computer starts.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If you add or change entries in this section, restart the computer for the
 changes to take effect.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 If the computer has more than one network adapter card (and NetBIOS
 drivers), the order of the entries in the [networks] section determines the
 order in which LAN Manager looks for resources on the networks, with the
 exception of the loopback driver.

 If the special loopback driver is available, LAN Manager searches for
 resources first on the local server, and then searches each remaining
 network in the order in which they appear in the [networks] section.

 Entries in the [networks] section have the format

 netn=devicename$,ln,type,sess,ncb,name

 where

 netn=
   Sets the name of a network and a number for the network adapter card. The
   number (n) in each entry has no ordering effect; it is only a means of
   identifying a given network in later LANMAN.INI entries. This number is
   usually 1 because, typically, a workstation is connected to one network.
   Put each entry on a separate line.

 devicename$
   Is the name of the NetBIOS device driver in the LANMAN\DRIVERS directory.
   Use the $ after the driver name, and do not include the driver name
   extension. This is the only required entry.

 ln
   Is the local-area network adapter (LANA) number. If the driver is set up
   to handle more than one of the same kind of network adapter card, ln
   specifies which card to access. The default is zero.

 type
   Specifies the driver type. Legal values are LM10 and NB30. The default is
   LM10. LM10 specifies LAN Manager drivers; NB30 specifies IBM NetBIOS 3.0
   drivers.

 sess
   Specifies the number of sessions. The default is the current setting for
   the transport driver (NetBEUI).

 ncb
   Specifies the number of network control blocks (NCBs). The default is the
   current setting for the transport driver (NetBEUI).

 name
   Specifies the number of names. The default is the current setting for the
   transport driver (NetBEUI).

 Include one net entry for each network adapter card installed in the
 computer. For example, the following entry identifies net1 as the
 NETBEUI.OS2 NetBIOS driver with an ln of 0:

   net1 = netbeui$,0



 The Networks Section for MS-DOS

 This section contains only one entry, netservices, with the following list
 of services:


   ş   chknet (checks to see that the network has been installed)

   ş   minses (provides the interface between LAN Manager for MS-DOS and
       NetBIOS)

   ş   netbind (optional; binds together a transport driver such as
       NETBEUI.SYS with a media access control driver such as IBMTOK.SYS)


 For example:

   netservices=checknet,minses


 The Workstation Section

 The [workstation] section configures the Workstation service. Entries in
 this section include values for the name of the computer, the name of the
 workstation domain, memory allocation, other controls for adjusting the
 workstation's performance on the network, and services to start with the
 Workstation service.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 When setting values for an MS-DOS workstation, make sure the following
 formula is satisfied:

 ((numresources*103)+ (numservers*68)+ (maxcommands*67)+ (numwrkbuf*60)+
 (lastdrive*90)+ (numwrkbuf*(sizworkbuf+87))+ (numcharbuf*(sizcharbuf+87)*2)+
 (numbigbuf*(sizbigbuf+87))+ ((files+fcbs)*40)+
 (numservices*(sizserviceinfo2+4))+ 18K )< 64K
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The [workstation] section contains the following entries:

 computername
   Is a unique name that identifies the server or workstation on the network.
   The Workstation service won't start if the computername matches any other
   computername or domain name on the network, the username of any user
   currently logged on to the network, or any message alias currently in use
   on the network.

   Computernames can have 1-15 characters, including letters, numbers, and
   the following symbols:

   ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

 charcount
   Sets the number of characters, in bytes, that the workstation stores
   before sending them to a communication-device queue (comm queue). Increase
   this number to minimize traffic on the network. The range is 0-65535; the
   default is 16 bytes. Valid minimum and maximum values for this entry
   depend on the communication device. For more information, see the device
   manual(s).

 chartime
   Sets the number of milliseconds that the workstation collects data before
   sending the information to a comm queue. Increase this number to limit
   traffic on the network. Setting this number too low degrades network
   performance by generating more network activity. The range is 0-65535000;
   the default is 250 milliseconds. Use the value -1 for chartime to be
   ignored and have characters sent when the buffer with charcount size is
   filled. Valid minimum and maximum values for this entry depend on the
   communication device. For more information, see the device manual(s).

 charwait
   Sets the number of seconds that the workstation waits for a requested
   communication device (such as a modem) or named pipe to become available.
   Increase this number for heavy traffic on the network or heavy use of
   shared communication devices if you are willing to wait for shared
   devices. The range is 0-65535; the default is 3600 seconds. (For MS-DOS,
   the default is 128 seconds.) Valid minimum and maximum values for this
   entry may depend on the communication device. For more information, see
   the device manual(s).

 domain
   Sets the domain name for a group of computers. The domain determines which
   servers and server resources are displayed in LAN Manager lists. The
   domain entry also affects where broadcast messages are sent.

   For servers with user-level security running the Netlogon service, the
   domain entry determines how the servers share a common database of user
   accounts. Each domain can have one primary domain controller, and any
   number of backup domain controllers, member servers, and standalone
   servers.

   The domain name cannot be the same as any computername on the network,
   including your computername. The name can have 1-15 characters, including
   letters, numbers, and the following symbols:

   ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

   The default is DOMAIN.

 himem (MS-DOS only)
   Determines if high memory allocation is used by the workstation. Values
   are yes, no, and optional. If optional is selected, the workstation
   determines whether to utilize high memory allocation. The computer must
   have an expanded memory board installed to select yes or optional; the
   default is no.

 keepapis
   Determines if LAN Manager Enhanced application program interfaces (APIs)
   are available to applications. Values are yes or no. If no is specified,
   only named pipe APIs are available; the LAN Manager Screen and some LAN
   Manager commands will not work. Note that if APIs are not desired, the
   Setup program should be used to reinstall LAN Manager Enhanced without
   APIs or to install LAN Manager Basic. The default is yes. Note that if yes
   is specified, mailslots must also be yes.

 keepconn
   Sets the number of seconds that the workstation maintains an inactive
   connection to a shared resource. The range is 1-65535; the default is 600
   seconds.

 keepsearch
   Sets the number of seconds that the workstation maintains inactive file
   search information. The range is 1-65535; the default is 600 seconds.

 lanroot (MS-DOS only)
   Sets the root directory for LAN Manager files. The default is LANMAN.DOS.

 lim (MS-DOS only)
   Sets whether expanded memory support is used by the workstation. The
   computer must have LIM version 4.0 or higher installed to select yes.
   Values are yes and no; the default is yes. (This value is commented out in
   the original file).

 mailslots
   Determines whether the workstation can view servers, and receive
   second-class mailslots and broadcast messages. The values are yes or no.
   The default is yes. Note that yes must be specififed if keepapis is yes.

 maxcmds
   Sets the maximum number of NetBIOS commands the workstation software can
   send simultaneously to all the computer's network adapter cards. Increase
   this number if users simultaneously run several applications that use LAN
   Manager.

   The range is (5 * number of wrknets) to 255; the default is 16 NetBIOS
   commands. (For MS-DOS, the default is 11 NetBIOS commands.) The
   recommended value is (1.6 * maxthreads).

 maxerrorlog (MS OS/2 only)
   Sets the maximum size of the error log, in kilobytes. This entry keeps the
   error log from filling up the hard disk. If you need disk space more than
   extensive error information, reduce this number. The range is 2 to total
   disk size; the default is 100 kilobytes.

 maxthreads
   Sets the maximum number of execution threads that can use the network by
   means of the Workstation service. Increase this number if you
   simultaneously run multiple applications that use LAN Manager. The range
   is 10-254; the default is 10 threads.

 maxwrkcache (MS OS/2 only)
   Sets the maximum number of kilobytes for the workstation's large-transfer
   buffers. Increase this number for better performance on file-intensive
   tasks like copying large files. This number must be a multiple of 64
   kilobytes. The range is 0-640; the default is 64 kilobytes.

 numalerts (MS OS/2 only)
   Sets the number of program tasks that can be waiting on an alert
   condition. Increase this value only if you use a server-based application
   which requires the increase. The range is 3-200; the default is 12 program
   tasks.

 numbigbuf (MS-DOS only)
   Sets the number of big buffers that the workstation uses to receive large
   files or amounts of data from servers. Buffer size is set with the
   sizbigbuf entry. The range is 0-255; the default is 0 buffers.

 numcharbuf
   Sets the number of pipe and device buffers. Increase this number if you
   use several shared communication devices or pipes, or transmit large
   amounts of data across the network to such devices. The range is 0-15; the
   default is 10 buffers. (For MS-DOS, the default is 2 buffers.)

 numdgrambuf
   Sets the number of buffers that process incoming datagrams. (Servers use
   datagrams to broadcast their presence. Datagrams are also used for
   domainwide broadcasts.) If you view domains with many servers, you might
   want more datagram buffers to handle incoming announcements. The value of
   numdgrambuf is the number of buffers per network listed in the wrknets
   entry. The range is 8-112; the default is 14. (For MS-DOS, the range is
   3-112; the default is 3.)

 nummailslots (MS-DOS only)
   Sets the number of mailslots available on the workstation. The range is
   0-255; the default is 2 mailslots.

 numresources (MS-DOS only)
   Sets the maximum number of connections to shared resources that the
   workstation can have at one time. The range is 1-255; the default is 9
   connections.

 numservers (MS-DOS only)
   Sets the maximum number of servers to which the workstation can have
   active connections at one time. The range is 1-255; the default is 9
   servers.

 numservices
   Sets the size of the internal service table. This number should be greater
   than or equal to the number of entries in the [services] section of the
   LANMAN.INI file. Increase this value if the workstation runs many LAN
   Manager services. The range is 4-256; the default is 8 services. (For
   MS-DOS, the range is 1-255; the default is 5 services.)

 numviewedservers (MS-DOS only)
   Sets the maximum number of servers that can be viewed with the net view
   command and the LAN Manager Screen. The range is 0-255; the default is 50
   servers.

 numworkbuf
   Sets the number of buffers that the workstation uses to store data for
   transmission, thus increasing network efficiency. The range is 3-50; the
   default is 15 buffers. (For MS-DOS, the default is 5 buffers.)

 othdomains
   Provides names of additional domains shown in LAN Manager displays. The
   workstation also receives messages and alerts sent to these domains. The
   range is 0-4 names. Separate multiple name entries with a comma.

   A domain name can have 1-15 characters, including letters, numbers, and
   the following symbols:

   ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

 printbuftime (MS OS/2 only)
   Sets the number of seconds that the prn: print device is kept open (for
   compatibility-mode print requests). Most applications that use MS OS/2
   compatibility mode do not explicitly close the prn: print device to tell
   MS OS/2 to send the contents of the print buffer to the printer queue. The
   range is 0-65535; the default is 90 seconds.

 sesstimeout (MS OS/2 only)
   Sets the number of seconds that the workstation waits before disconnecting
   a session with a server that is no longer responding. The range is
   10-65535; the default is 45 seconds.

 sizbigbuff (MS-DOS only)
   Sets the size, in bytes, of big buffers used to receive large files or
   amounts of data. The numbigbuf entry sets the number of buffers. The range
   is 0-65535; the default is 4096 bytes.

 sizcharbuf
   Sets the number of bytes for named pipe and character device buffers.
   Increase this number for better communication-device performance. The
   range is 64-4096; the default is 512 bytes. (For MS-DOS, the default is
   128 bytes.)

 sizerror (MS OS/2 only)
   Sets the size, in bytes, of the internal error buffer. Reduce this number
   if you need more memory and network errors are not frequent. The range is
   256-4096; the default is 1024 bytes.

 sizworkbuf
   Sets the number of bytes for workstation buffers. Increase this number to
   handle large amounts of data such as database records. The value should be
   a multiple of 512, the same for every workstation on the network, and the
   same as the value of the sizreqbuf entry (used by servers). The range is
   1024-16384; the default is 4096 bytes. (For MS-DOS, the range is 64-4096;
   the default is 1024 bytes.)

 wrkheuristics (MS OS/2 only)
   Is a set of digits that configure how a workstation processes network
   information. Digits read from left (0) to right (54). A digit value of 0
   means "off" or "inactive," and 1 means "on" or "active." Other values are
   explained in the following descriptions of each digit:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 0                                 Request opportunistic locking of files.
                                   This opens files on the server with
                                   "deny none" rights, allowing faster
                                   buffering. If another workstation
                                   requests access to the same file, the
                                   server lets the first workstation flush
                                   data before granting access to the
                                   second.

                                   The default is 1.

 1                                 Optimize performance for command files.
                                   Heuristic 0, opportunistic locking, must
                                   be set to 1.

                                   The default is 1.

 2                                 Unlock and WriteUnlock asynchronously as
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
2                                 Unlock and WriteUnlock asynchronously as
                                   follows:

                                   0 = never
                                   1 = always
                                   2 = only on a LAN Manager virtual
                                   circuit (VC)

                                   The default is 1.

                                   When a user unlocks a file, it usually
                                   works if the application is written
                                   correctly. If Unlocks and WriteUnlocks
                                   are asynchronous, the user need not wait
                                   for the server to indicate the bytes
                                   were unlocked. If asynchronous Unlock
                                   and WriteUnlock is selected, the user
                                   overlaps local processing with the
                                   server processing the unlock (and
                                   overlap transport time). Asynchronous
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  overlap transport time). Asynchronous
                                   Unlock and WriteUnlock is not used if
                                   write through is set.

 3                                 Close and WriteClose asynchronously as
                                   follows:

                                   0 = never
                                   1 = always
                                   2 = only on a LAN Manager VC

                                   The default is 1.

                                   When transferring large files, the
                                   workstation can get ahead of the server
                                   if all data transferred to the server is
                                   in its buffers but not processed to disk.
                                   When the server gets a Close or
                                   WriteClose request, it flushes all data
                                   to disk (or to the operating system
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  to disk (or to the operating system
                                   cache) before it processes and returns
                                   the close response. When this digit is
                                   set to 1, the close is sent, the
                                   workstation does not wait for the
                                   response, and a user can overlap local
                                   processing with the server (write to
                                   disk at the same time). A "some data may
                                   have been lost" popup message warns
                                   users if all data is not written to disk.

 4                                 Buffer named pipes and communication
                                   devices.

                                   The default is 1.

                                   Buffering named pipe and communication
                                   devices protects information by putting
                                   it in a buffer. Then the workstation
                                   reads the information from the buffer.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  reads the information from the buffer.

 5                                 LockRead and WriteUnlock as follows:

                                   0 = never
                                   1 = always
                                   2 = only on a LAN Manager VC

                                   The default is 1.

                                   The following diagrams illustrate this
                                   option for a database. The first diagram
                                   illustrates what happens when LockRead
                                   and WriteUnlock is set to 0:



 Workstation                       Server
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 lock -->

 <--OK, it's locked

 read -->

 <--OK, here is your data

 (update data record)

 write -->

 <--OK, data written

 unlock -->

 <--OK, it's unlocked

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                   The second diagram illustrates what
                                   happens when LockRead and WriteUnlock is
                                   set to 1 (default):


 Workstation                       Server
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 LockRead

 OK, it's locked and here is your data

 (update data record)

 WriteUnlock -->

 <--OK, it's written and unlocked

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                   Some applications use a dummy file to
                                   control the real database file (this
                                   means the application locks file A and
                                   reads file B). Data read along with the
                                   lock on file A is never used. On a
                                   high-speed network this should not
                                   matter, but on a slow network this could
                                   be a time loss. If you have a slow
                                   network and regularly use a database
                                   that uses a dummy file, consider setting
                                   this heuristic to 0.


ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 6                                 Use Open and Read.

                                   Set to 1, this heuristic combines Open
                                   and Read to get the first portion of a
                                   file at the same time the file is opened.
                                   This is faster because most files are
                                   read sequentially. For files that are
                                   not read sequentially, little
                                   performance is lost on a high-speed
                                   network. On a slow network, turn this
                                   off (0) if you use many applications
                                   that read files randomly.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  that read files randomly.

                                   The default is 1.

 7                                 Read-ahead to sector boundary.

                                   A file system that is not sensitive to
                                   the location of information or the
                                   reading of partial sectors on a disk (or
                                   one that has an active cache) performs
                                   better by reading ahead to a sector
                                   boundary.

                                   The default is 1.

 8                                 Use the "chain send" NetBIOS NCB as
                                   follows:

                                   0 = never
                                   1 = only if the server's buffer is
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  1 = only if the server's buffer is
                                   larger than the workstation buffer
                                   2 = always (to avoid copy)

                                   The default is 2.

                                   A chained send enables sending data
                                   directly from the user's buffer to the
                                   transport driver (bypassing data copy).
                                   The transport driver design determines
                                   which setting is optimum.

 9                                 Buffer small read/write requests
                                   (reading and writing a full buffer) as
                                   follows:

                                   0 = never
                                   1 = always
                                   2 = only on a LAN Manager VC

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

                                   The default is 1.

 10                                Use buffer mode (assuming that shared
                                   access is granted) as follows:

                                   0 = always read bufsize if request is
                                   smaller than bufsize
                                   1 = use full buffer if file is open for
                                   read/write
                                   2 = use full buffer if reading/writing
                                   sequentially
                                   3 = buffer all requests that are smaller
                                   than bufsize

                                   The default is 3.

 11                                Use raw data transfer (RAW) read/write
                                   server message block (SMB) protocols.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

                                   The default is 1.

 12                                Use large RAW read-ahead buffer.

                                   The default is 1.

 13                                Use large RAW write-behind buffer.

                                   The default is 1.

 14                                Use read multiplex (MPX) SMB protocols.

                                   The default is 1.

 15                                Use write multiplex (MPX) SMB protocols.

                                   The default is 1.

 16                                Use big buffer for large core reads.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
16                                Use big buffer for large core reads.

                                   The default is 1.

 17                                Set the read-ahead size as follows:

                                   0 = read to sector boundary
                                   1 = use a multiple of the size that the
                                   user is reading

                                   For example, if the user is reading
                                   50-byte pieces of a 4096-byte buffer,
                                   LAN Manager reads ahead to fill the
                                   buffer to 4050 bytes.

                                   The default is 1.

 18                                Set the write-behind size as follows:

                                   0 = write to sector boundary
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  0 = write to sector boundary
                                   1 = use a multiple of the size that the
                                   user is writing

                                   The default is 1.

 19                                Force 512-byte maximum transfers to and
                                   from core servers. At one time, core
                                   servers (same base SMB protocols as LAN
                                   Manager) could handle a maximum of 512
                                   byte buffers. Set this bit only if your
                                   network has this type of server and your
                                   workstation accesses the server.

                                   The default is 0.

 20                                Flush pipes and devices on DosBufReset
                                   or DosClose as follows:

                                   0 = only files/devices opened by caller;
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  0 = only files/devices opened by caller;
                                   spin until flushed
                                   1 = only files/devices opened by caller;
                                   flush only once
                                   2 = all files and all short-term
                                   pipe/device I/O; spin until flushed
                                   3 = all files and all short-term
                                   pipe/device I/O; flush only once
                                   4 = all files and pipe/device I/O; spin
                                   until flushed
                                   5 = all files and pipe/device I/O; flush
                                   only once

                                   The default is 0.

 21                                Use encryption if the server supports it.

                                   The default is 1.

 22                                Control log entries for multiple
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
22                                Control log entries for multiple
                                   occurrences of an error. Prevent a
                                   recurring error from filling up the
                                   error log by activating an interim table.

                                   Non-zero values for this heuristic
                                   define the number of errors in the table.
                                   For example, if you set the heuristic to
                                   5, the error table holds 5 errors in the
                                   following form:

                                   Error id number
                                   Number of occurrences

                                   Set the heuristic as follows:

                                   0 = log all error occurrences in the
                                   error log
                                   1 = use error table, size 1
                                   2 = use error table, size 2
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  2 = use error table, size 2
                                   3 = use error table, size 3
                                   4 = use error table, size 4
                                   5 = use error table, size 5
                                   6 = use error table, size 6
                                   7 = use error table, size 7
                                   8 = use error table, size 8
                                   9 = use error table, size 9

                                   The default is 0.

                                   For each entry in the table, LAN Manager
                                   writes to the error log on the 1st, 4th,
                                   8th, 16th, 32nd, and every further 32nd
                                   occurrence of the error.

                                   When an error occurs, LAN Manager
                                   determines whether the error is already
                                   listed in the table. If it is, LAN
                                   Manager increments the number of
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  Manager increments the number of
                                   occurrences. If the error is not in the
                                   table, LAN Manager adds it to the table;
                                   if the table is full, LAN Manager
                                   discards the entry with the lowest
                                   number of occurrences to make room for
                                   the new entry.

                                   NOTE "Out of Resource" errors are logged
                                   only once per resource type regardless
                                   of the value of this heuristic.



ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 23                                Buffer all files opened with "deny write"
                                   rights.

                                   The default is 1.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  The default is 1.

 24                                Buffer all files opened with R (read
                                   only) attribute.

                                   The default is 1.

 25                                Read ahead when opening a file for
                                   execution. (Sometimes reading an
                                   executable file appears sequential when
                                   it is not.)

                                   The default is 1.

 26                                Handle CTRL+C as follows:

                                   0 = do not allow interrupts
                                   1 = allow interrupts only on long-term
                                   operations
                                   2 = always allow interrupts
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  2 = always allow interrupts

                                   The default is 2.

 27                                Force correct open mode when creating
                                   files on a core server. Core servers
                                   open a new file in compatibility mode,
                                   which is not ordinarily a problem. This
                                   heuristic forces the workstation to
                                   close the file and reopen it in the
                                   proper mode.

                                   The default is 0.

 28                                Use the NetBIOS NoAck mode (transfer
                                   data without an immediate acknowledgment)
                                   as follows:

                                   0 = never
                                   1 = NoAck on send only
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  1 = NoAck on send only
                                   2 = NoAck on receive only
                                   3 = NoAck on send and receive

                                   The default is 0.

 29                                Send data along with SMB write-block-raw
                                   requests.

                                   The default is 1.



 30                                Send a popup message screen when the
                                   workstation logs an error, as follows:

                                   0 = never
                                   1 = on write fault errors only (no
                                   timeout)
                                   2 = on write fault and internal errors
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  2 = on write fault and internal errors
                                   only (no timeout)
                                   3 = on all errors (no timeout)
                                   4 = (reserved)
                                   5 = on write fault errors only (timeout)

                                   6 = on write fault and internal errors
                                   only (timeout)
                                   7 = on all errors (timeout)

                                   The default is 1.

 31                                Close the print job, causing the remote
                                   spooler to print it if no activity
                                   occurs on the printer for the time
                                   specified:

                                   0 to 8 = (value+1) * 8 seconds
                                   9 = the number of seconds specified by
                                   printbuftime
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  printbuftime

                                   The default is 2.

 32                                Controls BufReset and SMBFlush behavior
                                   for the MS-DOS compatibility box:

                                   0 = flush dirty buffers to server, and
                                   wait for server to flush buffers to hard
                                   disk
                                   1 = flush dirty buffers to server, but
                                   do not wait
                                   2 = ignore BufReset

                                   The default is 2.

 33                                Controls the timeout value for
                                   performing logon validation from a
                                   domain controller:

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

                                   0 = 5 seconds
                                   1 = 15 seconds
                                   2 = 30 seconds
                                   3 = 45 seconds
                                   4 = 1 minute
                                   5 = 1 minute, 30 seconds
                                   6 = 2 minutes
                                   7 = 4 minutes
                                   8 = 8 minutes
                                   9 = 15 minutes

                                   The default is 1.

 34-54                             Reserved.



 wrkheuristics (MS-DOS only)
   Is a set of digits that configure how an MS-DOS workstation processes
   network information. Digits read from left (0) to right (32). A digit
   value of 0 means "off" or "inactive," while 1 means "on" or "active."
   Other values are explained in the following descriptions of each digit:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 0                                 Turn on write-through bit on all open
                                   files.

                                   The default is 1.

 1                                 Do asynchronous write buffer and close
                                   operations.

                                   The default is 1.

 2                                 Determine if NetBIOS performs a SEND
                                   operation during POST (Power-On,
                                   Self-Test).

                                   The default is 1 (allow NetBIOS to SEND
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  The default is 1 (allow NetBIOS to SEND
                                   during POST).

 3                                 Use buffer size transfer as follows:

                                   0 = limit transfer to local buffer size
                                   1 = use two read operations for core
                                   read
                                   2 = use "Message Incomplete" error for
                                   transfer (system performance is degraded)

                                   This parameter is used for I/O core
                                   servers.

                                   The default is 1.

 4                                 Use buffer mode (assuming that shared
                                   access is granted) as follows:

                                   0 = always read bufsize if request is
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  0 = always read bufsize if request is
                                   smaller than bufsize
                                   1 = use full buffer if file is open for
                                   read/write
                                   2 = use full buffer if reading/writing
                                   sequentially

                                   The default is 2.

 5                                 Pop up for hard errors.

                                   The default is 1 (pop up hard errors).

 6                                 Big buffer read-ahead. If not selected,
                                   system performance could be degraded.

                                   The default is 1 (use big buffer
                                   read-ahead).

 7                                 Send process exit SMBs as follows:
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
7                                 Send process exit SMBs as follows:

                                   0 = don't send
                                   1 = always send
                                   2 = send based on RPDB structure

                                   The default is 0.

 8                                 Request opportunistic locking of files.
                                   This opens files on the server with
                                   "deny none" rights, allowing faster
                                   buffering. If another workstation
                                   requests access to the same file, the
                                   server lets the first workstation flush
                                   data before granting access to the
                                   second.

                                   0 = do not request "Oplock"
                                   1 = request "Oplock"

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

                                   The default is 1.

 9                                 Use Open and Read.

                                   0 = no Open and Read
                                   1 = Open and Read on files with Read and
                                   Write access
                                   2 = Open and Read on files with Read,
                                   Write, and Execute access

                                   The default is 2.

 10                                Controls BufReset and SMBFlush behavior
                                   as follows:

                                   0 = flush dirty buffers to server, and
                                   wait for server to flush buffers to hard
                                   disk
                                   1 = flush dirty buffers to server, but
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  1 = flush dirty buffers to server, but
                                   do not wait
                                   2 = ignore BufReset

                                   The default is 2.

 11                                Controls beeping while the workstation
                                   waits for a network request to be
                                   processed. The value is the number of
                                   4-second intervals that the workstation
                                   waits before beeping. If value is set to
                                   zero, beeping is off. The range is 0-9.

                                   The default is 1 (one beep every four
                                   seconds).

 12                                Perform asynchronous read-ahead as
                                   follows:

                                   0 = never perform asynchronous
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  0 = never perform asynchronous
                                   read-ahead
                                   1 = perform asynchronous read-ahead at
                                   buffer end
                                   2 = perform asynchronous read-ahead for
                                   second pass on a buffer

                                   The default is 2.

 13                                Controls 3-way write, unlock, lock, and
                                   read SMB as follows:

                                   0 = don't issue
                                   1 = issue

                                   The default is 0.

 14-32                             Reserved



 wrknets
   Lists the names of the networks in which the workstation participates. For
   MS OS/2, the names are also listed in the [networks] section. Separate
   multiple name entries with a comma.

   For LAN Manager Enhanced, networks are represented by LANA numbers (for
   information about LANA numbers, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network
   Device Driver Guide).

   The range is net1 to the list from the [networks] section; the default is
   net1. (For MS-DOS, the range is 0-254; the default is 0.)

 wrkservices
   Lists LAN Manager services to start along with the Workstation service.
   The names of all services are listed in the [services] section. Separate
   multiple service name entries with a comma. Service names cannot be
   abbreviated. The range is no value to the list from the [services]
   section; the default is messenger,netpopup.


 The Messenger Section

 The [messenger] section specifies the buffer size and the default pathname
 for the log file used to log messages received.

 The [messenger] section contains the following entries:

 logfile
   Sets a pathname for the messages log. The default value for this entry is
   the filename MESSAGES.LOG, relative to the LAN Manager root directory.

 nummsgnames (MS-DOS only)
   Sets the maximum number of aliases you can add on the workstation. The
   range is 1-10; the default is 2 aliases.

 sizmessbuf
   Sets the number of bytes for the buffer that holds network messages.
   Increase this number to send or receive longer messages. The range is
   512-62000; the default is 4096 bytes. (For MS-DOS, the range is 128-62000;
   the default is 256 bytes.)


 The Netshell Section

 The [netshell] section configures the way that the workstation uses the LAN
 Manager Screen. It lists usernames and the rate for refreshing information
 on the screen. LAN Manager checks these values when you start the computer.


 The [netshell] section contains the following entries:

 refresh  (MS OS/2 only)
   Sets the number of seconds between times that the screen display is
   refreshed. This entry applies only to the LAN Manager Screen. The range is
   0-65535; the default is 15 seconds.

 remote (MS OS/2 only)
   Is the computername of the default remote server to administer using the
   net admin command.

 username
   Sets the username displayed when logging on to the network (unless you
   specify another username with the net logon command). This name can be the
   same as computername ([workstation] section). A username can have 1-20
   characters, including letters, numbers, and the following symbols:

   ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

   Message aliases can have only 15 characters, so a username with more than
   15 characters does not receive messages. The default is user.


 The Server Section

 The [server] section lists the entries that affect the server. Workstations
 do not have this section. When changing values for buffers and processes,
 remember that each takes memory. For best performance, do not allocate more
 memory than you need.

 The [server] section of the LANMAN.INI file is divided into two parts. The
 first part has entries likely to change, and the second part has entries
 that generally do not need to be changed. The entries are as follows:


 First Part

 alertnames
   Lists the usernames to receive administrative alert messages. Separate
   multiple username entries with a comma or semicolon (;). Do not use domain
   names.

 auditing
   Starts the server with auditing turned on if the value is yes, does not
   audit if the value is no, or audits listed events. The events list can be
   empty (no value, and default to no) or one or more of the following:
   logon, logonlimit, netlogon, goodnetlogon, permissions, resource, service,
   sesslogon, badsesslogon, goodsesslogon, use, baduse, gooduse, and
   userlist. The same event should not appear more than once in a list.

   Do not use yes and an event. To limit events when auditing = yes, use the
   noauditing entry.

   Values are yes, no, or event; the default is no.

 autodisconnect
   Sets the number of minutes that the server waits before disconnecting an
   inactive session. This option is available only to a server with an
   Unlimited User Pak. Use the value -1 and the server never disconnects an
   inactive session. The range is -1-65535; the default is -1.

 autopath
   Sets the location of the automatic server profile. The path can be an
   absolute path beginning with a drive letter, a network path, or a filename
   relative to LANMAN\PROFILES. The default filename is SRVAUTO.PRO.

 autoprofile
   Determines the behavior of the server's automatic profile, with the
   following possible values:

     load
       Load the profile when the server starts.

     save
       Save the profile when the server stops.

     both
       Loads the profile at startup and saves the profile when the server
       stops.

     none
       Don't use the profile.

   The default is load.

 maxusers
   Sets the maximum number of users who can use the server simultaneously.
   This is actually the number of sessions at the server; if two workstations
   using the same username have sessions, both sessions count toward the
   limit of this entry. The range is 1-1000; the default is 32 users.

   The value of maxusers should include the number allowed by your Additional
   User Pak(s) plus the number of users accessing the server through
   interprocess communication (IPC) connections (named pipes, used by network
   application programs such as the net run command or Microsoft SQL Server).

   For example, if you have a 25-user server, and you want to allow 10
   additional users to access the server through network application
   programs, you would set maxusers to 35.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Changing maxusers affects the maxconnections, numbigbuf, and numreqbuf
 entries. Use the Setup program to change the value of maxusers and
 automatically adjust these other entries. For more information about using
 the Setup program, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Installation Guide.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 noauditing
   Lists events not to audit if auditing is turned on. If the same events are
   listed with auditing and noauditing, a service status error occurs
   indicating conflicting values.  The list can be empty or contain one or
   more of the following events: logon, logonlimit, netlogon, goodnetlogon,
   permissions, resource, service, sesslogon, badsesslogon, goodsesslogon,
   use, baduse, gooduse, and userlist. The value of noauditing is ignored if
   the auditing option is no.

   The default is a null (empty) list.

 security
   Is the security mode for the server. The two possible values are user
   (user-level security) and share (share-level security). The default is
   user. Use the Setup program to change the value for this entry.

 srvcomment
   Supplies a comment seen by other computers in the server's domain (from
   the LAN Manager Screen or the net view display). Unlike other LANMAN.INI
   entries, the value of this entry is not converted to uppercase letters in
   the display. Enclose the comment in quotation marks. The comment can have
   as many as 48 characters, or be null (empty). The default is null (empty).


 Second Part

 accessalert
   Sets the number of resource access violations that can occur within an
   alertsched interval before the server sends an alert message. This entry
   applies to servers with user-level security only. Reduce this number if
   tight server security is necessary. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5
   violations.

 alertsched
   Sets the number of minutes for how often the server checks for alert
   conditions and sends needed alert messages. Checking for alert conditions
   uses memory and computing power; reduce the number only if you need more
   frequent checking for alert conditions. The range is 0-65535; the default
   is 5 minutes.

 diskalert
   Sets the minimum number of free kilobytes of hard disk space that the
   server tolerates before sending an alert message. Increase this number if
   disk space on the server is a concern. The range is 0-65535; the default
   is 300 kilobytes.

 erroralert
   Sets the number of errors that can occur within an alertsched interval
   before the server sends an alert message. Reduce this number for rapid
   notification of errors. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5 errors.

 guestacct
   Is the name of the server's guest account. The server uses the guest
   account to grant access to shared resources to a user who does not have a
   user account.

   A guest name can have 1-20 characters, including letters, numbers, and the
   following symbols:

   ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

   If the guest account name is null (empty), users must have a user account
   to use the shared resources on this server.

   The default name is guest.

 logonalert
   Sets the number of logon violations that can occur within an alertsched
   interval before a server with user-level security sends an alert message.
   Reduce this number if tight server security is necessary. The range is
   0-65535; the default is 5 logon violations.

 maxauditlog
   Sets the maximum number of kilobytes for the audit trail. When the size of
   the audit trail reaches this value, LAN Manager stops saving messages in
   the audit trail. Message saving starts again as soon as the audit trail is
   cleared. Reduce this number if you don't need extensive audit information.
   The range is 0-65535; the default is 100 kilobytes.

 maxchdevjob
   Sets the maximum number of requests that the server accepts for all
   communication-device queues (comm queues) combined. Increase this number
   if communication devices are heavily used. The range is 0-65535; the
   default is 6 requests.

 maxchdevq
   Sets the maximum number of shared comm queues. The range is 0-65535; the
   default is 2 comm queues.

 maxchdevs
   Sets the maximum number of shared communication devices. Set this number
   to the number of communication devices that the server will share with the
   network. The range is 0-16; the default is 2 communication devices.

 maxconnections
   Sets the maximum number of connections that workstations can have to the
   server. Increase this number if many users will use the server. The range
   is the value of maxusers to 2000; the default is 128 connections.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 This entry is adjusted by the Setup program depending on the value of the
 maxusers entry and the amount of memory in the computer.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 maxlocks
   Sets the maximum number of file locks for the server files. Increase this
   number if many people use many files. This entry applies only to networks
   that include MS-DOS workstations. The range is 1-8000; the default is 64
   file locks.

 maxopens
   Sets the maximum number of open files, pipes, and devices that the server
   can have at one time. Increase this number if many people use the server
   simultaneously. The range is 1-8000; the default is 64 opens.

 maxsearches
   Sets the number of file searches that the server can do simultaneously.
   Increase this number if many people use files on the server. See heuristic
   7 of the srvheuristics entry for more information about searches. The
   range is 0-1927; the default is 50 file searches.

 maxsessopens
   Sets the maximum number of files, pipes, and devices that one workstation
   can have open at the server. Increase this number if people use many of
   the server's resources simultaneously. The range is 1 to the value of
   maxopens; the default is 50 opens.

 maxsessreqs
   Sets the maximum number of resource requests that one workstation can have
   pending at the server. Increase this number if users perform multiple
   tasks at the server simultaneously. The range is 1-65535; the default is
   50 requests.

 maxsessvcs
   Sets the maximum number of virtual circuits that the server can accept
   from a workstation. This entry must be set to 1.

 maxshares
   Sets the maximum number of resources that the server shares with the
   network. Increase this number if the server shares many resources. The
   range is 2-500; the default is 16 resources.

 netioalert
   Sets the number of network I/O errors that can occur within an alertsched
   interval before the server sends an alert message. Reduce this number if
   network reliability is a concern. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5
   I/O errors.

 numadmin
   Sets the maximum number of users who can simultaneously perform
   administrative tasks on a server. The maximum number of users set for the
   ADMIN$ share overrides the value of numadmin when they are not the same.
   The range is 0-65535; the default is 2 users.

 numbigbuf
   Sets the number of big buffers that the server uses for moving large files
   or amounts of data. Increase this number if the server moves large files
   too slowly. Each buffer takes up 64 kilobytes of memory, so don't allocate
   more big buffers than your server can support.

   You should ideally have two big buffers for each simultaneous, heavy-load
   user of a FAT file partition. For example, if you have 10 users but only 3
   of them are copying large files at the same time, you want 6 big buffers.

   Do not allocate more memory for numbigbuf than you allocate for the disk
   cache (defined in your CONFIG.SYS file). The disk cache should equal
   approximately (numbigbuf * 64).

   When using a file server with HPFS386, do not set more than three big
   buffers unless the server is also doing extensive I/O on FAT file
   partitions. If a server is only a file server with HPFS386, set numbigbuf
   to 0.

   The range is 0-80; the default is 3 big buffers.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE
 This entry is adjusted by the Setup program depending on the value of the
 maxusers entry and the amount of memory in the computer.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 numfiletasks
   Sets the number of processes designated to handle file and print requests
   from workstations. Increase this number if the server is heavily used for
   file or printer sharing. Each process takes up memory, so don't allocate
   more processes than you need. The range is 1-8; the default is 1 process.

 numreqbuf
   Sets the number of buffers that the server uses to take requests from
   workstations. Increase this number if you need better performance from the
   server. Each buffer takes up memory, so don't allocate more buffers than
   you need. The recommended value is 3 buffers per user (3 * number of
   maxusers), with 2 additional buffers for each named pipe to be used. The
   minimum value is 5, although you should avoid using a minimum of less than
   15. The recommended maximum is 300, although the actual maximum is
   dependent on the amount of memory available. The default is 15 buffers.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 This entry is adjusted by the Setup program depending on the value of the
 maxusers entry and the amount of memory in the computer.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 sizreqbuf
   Sets the number of bytes for the buffers that the server uses to take
   requests from workstations. Increase this number if many people use the
   server simultaneously; for optimum performance, this setting and the
   sizworkbuf setting for every workstation using the server should be the
   same.

   Server request buffers are stored in 64-kilobyte segments. Each buffer has
   260 bytes added to it for internal use. The range is 1024-32768; the
   default is 4096 bytes.

 srvanndelta
   Sets the number of milliseconds that the server varies its announce rate.
   Varying the announce rate evens out traffic on the network. The range is
   0-65535; the default is 3000 milliseconds.

 srvannounce
   Sets the number of seconds when a nonhidden server announces its presence
   on the network. The range is 0-65535; the default is 60 seconds.

 srvheuristics
   Configures how a server processes network requests. There are 19 digits,
   reading from left (0) to right (18). (The default LANMAN.INI file numbers
   these digits in comments for convenience.) A digit value of 0 means "off"
   or "inactive," and 1 means "on" or "active." Other values are explained in
   the following description of each digit:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 0                                 Request opportunistic locking when
                                   opening files to make the Server service
                                   seem like the only application running
                                   on the server, then the service can
                                   safely buffer a file with "deny none"
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  safely buffer a file with "deny none"
                                   rights.

                                   The default is 1.

 1                                 Use read-ahead when the client performs
                                   sequential access as follows:

                                   0 = do not use read-ahead
                                   1 = use single-thread read-ahead
                                   2 = use asynchronous read-ahead thread

                                   The default is 1.

 2                                 Use write-behind (tell the client that a
                                   write is completed before actually
                                   performing the write). If the write
                                   generates an error, the error appears on
                                   a subsequent write. Files opened for
                                   write-through cannot use write-behind.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  write-through cannot use write-behind.


                                   The default is 1.

 3                                 Use chain sends.

                                   The default is 1.

 4                                 Check all incoming SMBs for correct
                                   format. This is useful with mixed
                                   versions and brands of network software
                                   on the network.

                                   The default is 1.

 5                                 Support file control block (FCB) opens
                                   (collapse all FCB opens for a file to a
                                   single open). This is only useful with
                                   MS-DOS workstations on the network.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  MS-DOS workstations on the network.

                                   The default is 1.

 6                                 Set the priority for the server. For a
                                   definition of "class" and "delta," see
                                   the MS OS/2 manula(s) for the MS OS/2
                                   DosSetPriority function. Otherwise, if
                                   you set the priority to 5 rather than 4,
                                   the server responds more quickly to
                                   commands typed at the keyboard, but this
                                   lowers network response performance. The
                                   possible values are



ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Server Priority
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting          Class  Delta
 Server Priority
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Setting          Class  Delta
 0                3      31
 1                3      23
 2                3      15
 3                3      7
 4                3      0
 5                2      31
 6                2      23
 7                2      15
 8                2      7
 9                2      0
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                   The default is 5.

 7                                 Allocate additional memory for searches,
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
7                                 Allocate additional memory for searches,
                                   with a maximum of 1,927 searches. This
                                   should be set to 1 if MS-DOS
                                   workstations are on the network. For
                                   more information about searches, see the
                                   maxsearches entry.

                                   The default is 1.

 8                                 Write records to the audit trail only
                                   when the scavenger wakes up. The
                                   scavenger is a thread of the server
                                   process that performs the following
                                   tasks:

                                   Disconnects sessions automatically (see
                                   autodisconnect)
                                   Sends administrative alerts (see
                                   alertsched)
                                   Writes to the audit trail (see auditing)
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  Writes to the audit trail (see auditing)

                                   When this is set to 0, any write to the
                                   audit trail wakes up the scavenger.
                                   (Heuristic 10 controls the wake-up
                                   interval of the scavenger.)

                                   The default is 1.

 9                                 Perform full buffering (as controlled by
                                   heuristics 1 and 2) when a file is
                                   opened with "deny write." When this is
                                   set to 0, deny write access has no
                                   buffering.

                                   The default is 1.

 10                                Set the interval for the scavenger to
                                   wake up as follows:

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

                                   0 =  5 seconds
                                   1 = 10 seconds
                                   2 = 15 seconds
                                   3 = 20 seconds
                                   4 = 25 seconds
                                   5 = 30 seconds
                                   6 = 35 seconds
                                   7 = 40 seconds
                                   8 = 45 seconds
                                   9 = 50 seconds

                                   Heuristic 8 can cause the scavenger to
                                   wake up at other times.

                                   The default is 1.



ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 11                                Control how the server regulates access
                                   to .EXE, .COM, and .BAT files when more
                                   than one workstation requests access.
                                   Access is regulated by the following
                                   modes: "compatibility mode" allows
                                   exclusive access to the file by one
                                   workstation, "Deny Write sharing mode"
                                   allows the file to be read from but not
                                   written to by other workstations while
                                   open, and "Deny None sharing mode"
                                   allows the file to be read from and
                                   written to by other workstations while
                                   open. Values are as follows:

                                   0 = Always use compatibility mode.
                                   1 = Use Deny None sharing mode if the
                                   workstation requests read-only access to
                                   a .EXE or .COM file. Use compatibility
                                   mode for a .BAT file or if the
                                   workstation requests write access to a
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  workstation requests write access to a
                                   .EXE or .COM file.
                                   2 = Use Deny None sharing mode if the
                                   workstation requests read-only access to
                                   a .EXE or .COM file. Use Deny Write
                                   sharing mode if the workstation requests
                                   read-only access to a .BAT file. Use
                                   compatibility mode if the workstation
                                   requests write access to a .EXE, .COM,
                                   or .BAT file.
                                   3 = Translate all compatibility mode
                                   opens to Deny None sharing mode opens.

                                   The default is 2.

                                   NOTE For servers running HPFS386, values
                                   are: 0 = Always use compatibility mode;
                                   1, 2, or 3 = Translate read-only
                                   requests to Deny Write sharing mode for
                                   all files.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  all files.

 12                                Enable MS-DOS workstations to use a
                                   second virtual circuit (VC) when sending
                                   print jobs. If this is not set, a second
                                   VC aborts any previous sessions set up
                                   for that MS-DOS workstation.

                                   The default is 1.

 13                                Set the number of big buffers used for
                                   read-ahead. Possible values are 0-9,
                                   where 0 means that read-ahead is
                                   disabled. If this is set to a value
                                   larger than numbigbuf, then it is reset
                                   to the value of (numbigbuf -1). Each big
                                   buffer is divided into sixteen
                                   4-kilobyte read-ahead buffers. Allocate
                                   more than one big buffer if you process
                                   many files with small reads
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  many files with small reads
                                   simultaneously.

                                   The default is 1.

 14                                "Canonicalize" all incoming path
                                   specifications, converting characters to
                                   uppercase and slashes (/) to backslashes
                                   (\). This is useful when XENIX(R)
                                   computers are on the network.

                                   The default is 0.


 15                                Set the time that the server waits after
                                   breaking an opportunistic lock (see
                                   heuristic 0). You might want to set a
                                   longer time if the network is subject to
                                   long delays. The possible values are

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Opportunistic Lock Timeout
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Value                                 Time (seconds)
 0                                     35
 1                                     70
 2                                     140
 3                                     210
 4                                     280
 5                                     350
 6                                     420
 7                                     490
 8                                     560
 9                                     640
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                   If a second client attempts to open a
                                   locked file, the server notifies the
                                   first client to flush buffers and
                                   prepare to unlock. If the first client
                                   does not respond within the specified
                                   time, the server closes the first
                                   client's open of the file.

                                   The default is 0.

 16                                Validate Input/Output controls (IOCtl)
                                   across the network. When this is set to
                                   1, the server accepts only generic
                                   device IOCtls (categories 01H, 05H, and
                                   0BH), as defined in the device driver
                                   manual for MS OS/2.

                                   With this digit set to 0, the server
                                   could receive invalid IOCtl pointers due
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  could receive invalid IOCtl pointers due
                                   to differences in device drivers between
                                   vendors. This can crash the server. You
                                   may need to set this to 0 in order to
                                   use certain device drivers, such as
                                   custom-built drivers.

                                   The default is 1.


 17                                Set the time that the server maintains
                                   unused dynamic big buffers before
                                   freeing the memory. This digit can be
                                   from 0-9, with the following meanings:



 Digit                             Timeout
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 0                                 0 seconds (timeout immediately after use)

 1                                 1 second

 2                                 10 seconds

 3                                 1 minute

 4                                 5 minutes

 5                                 10 minutes

 6                                 20 minutes

 7                                 40 minutes

 8                                 1 hour

 9                                 Maintain big buffers indefinitely

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                   The default is 3.

 18                                Set the time that the server waits after
                                   failing to allocate a big buffer before
                                   trying again. This value can be from 0-5,
                                   with the following meanings:


 Digit                             Timeout
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 0                                 0 seconds

 1                                 1 second

 2                                 10 seconds

 3                                 1 minute

 4                                 5 minutes

 5                                 10 minutes

 6-9                               Illegal

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                    The default is 3.

 srvhidden
   Determines whether the server is shown in any lists of network servers.
   The possible values are yes and no. The default is no, meaning it will be
   shown. (The default value for a workstation running the Peer service is
   yes.)

 srvnets
   Lists the names of the networks in which the server can participate. The
   names of the networks are listed in the [networks] section of the
   LANMAN.INI file.

   Every network listed here must also be listed in the wrknets entry in the
   [workstation] section.

   The range is net1 to the list from the [networks] section; the default is
   net1.

 srvservices
   Lists the LAN Manager services to start along with the server. The names
   of services are listed in the [services] section of the LANMAN.INI file.
   Separate multiple service name entries with a comma. The range is no value
   to the list from the [services] section; the default is alerter. Service
   names cannot be abbreviated.

 userpath
   Sets the pathname to the directory holding the user directories. A
   pathname can be absolute, a network path (UNC), or relative to the LANMAN
   directory. The default path is ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS.


 The Alerter Section

 The [alerter] section controls the service that sends administrative alerts
 across the network. Workstations do not have this section.

 The [alerter] section contains the following entry:

 sizalertbuf
   Sets the size, in bytes, of the buffer used for administrative alerts. The
   range is 512-16384; the default is 3072 bytes.


 The Netrun Section

 The [netrun] section controls the service that enables workstations to run a
 program on the server. Workstations do not have this section.

 The [netrun] section contains the following entries:

 maxruns
   Sets the maximum number of netrun requests that can run simultaneously.
   The value of this entry affects the numreqbuf entry in the [server]
   section; numreqbuf must be at least five times greater than maxruns. The
   range is 1-10; the default is 3 netrun requests.

 runpath
   Sets the paths where programs for the Netrun service are located. Only
   programs located in a runpath can be executed from a workstation or
   another server. Path syntax is the same as for MS OS/2 path variables.
   Separate multiple pathname entries with a semicolon (;). The default is a
   null (empty) runpath.


 The Replicator Section

 The [replicator] section controls the LAN Manager service that maintains
 identical copies of selected directories and files on specified computers.
 This service is intended for servers, but can be run on workstations.

 The [replicator] section contains the following entries:

 exportlist
   Lists the import servers and domains to receive update notices; 0-32 names
   can be used. Without a list, the export server sends notices to its
   domain. When specifying a computername, do not include the two backslashes
   (\\) at the beginning of the name. Separate multiple names with a
   semicolon (;).

 exportpath
   Sets the path to the export directory. A path can be absolute or relative
   to the LANMAN directory. All files to be replicated must be in this
   directory or one of its subdirectories. The default path is REPL\EXPORT.
   This option is ignored if /replicate is set to import.

 guardtime
   Sets the number of minutes that the export directory must be stable before
   import servers can connect to it. The range is 0 to (half the value of
   interval); the default is 2 minutes.

 importlist
   Lists export servers; 0-32 names can be used. When specifying a
   computername, do not include the two backslashes (\\) at the beginning of
   the name. Separate multiple names with a semicolon (;).

 importpath
   Sets the absolute path to the import directory or a path relative to the
   LANMAN directory. All files to be replicated must be in this directory or
   one of its subdirectories. The default path is REPL\IMPORT.

 interval
   Sets the number of minutes that the subdirectories and files in the export
   directory are checked to determine if any changes are to be replicated.
   The range is 1-60; the default is 5 minutes.

 logon
   Sets the username that the import server uses to connect to the export
   server when no username is logged on at the import server.

 password
   Sets the password that the import server uses to connect to the export
   server when no username is logged on at the import server.

 pulse
   Sets how often the export server repeats notices of changes to import
   servers. The server waits (pulse *  interval) minutes before sending each
   repeat notice. The range is 1-10; the default is 3. This entry is ignored
   at import servers.

 random
   Sets a random number of seconds that the import servers can wait before
   requesting an update. The maximum time is set by the export server. The
   range is 1-120; the default is 60 seconds.

 replicate
   Determines if the server is to keep a master tree of directories and files
   to be replicated (export), is to replicate directories or files from
   another server (import), or both. Values are import, export, or both; the
   default is import.

 tryuser
   Determines whether the import server should try to update directories when
   a username is logged on locally. Values are yes or no; the default is yes.



 The UPS Section

 The [ups] section lists all the entries that affect the device driver
 settings for the uninterruptible power supply (UPS). Workstations do not
 have this section.

 The [ups] section contains the following entries:

 batterytime
   Sets the number of seconds that the server can run on a battery before the
   UPS service initiates shutdown. This entry is relevant only if the low
   battery signal is unavailable. Set the value based on the power supply
   specification. The range is 0-28800; the default is 60 seconds.

 cmdfile
   Sets the pathname for the batch program (.CMD extension) of commands to be
   run before the server is shut down. The pathname can be absolute, relative
   to the LANMAN directory, or null (empty).

   The UPS service automatically pauses the server, sends alert messages,
   sends messages to \\computernames, and writes a shutdown message to the
   error log. If power is not restored, and the battery is about to run out
   of power, the UPS service first runs commands from the cmdfile (for no
   longer than 30 seconds), and then runs net stop server and net stop
   workstation. It is not necessary to include these commands in the cmdfile.

 messdelay
   Sets the number of seconds between the initial power failure and the first
   message sent to users. No messages are sent if power is restored within
   this amount of time. The range is 0-120; the default is 5 seconds.

 messtime
   Sets the number of seconds between messages sent to users notifying them
   of a power failure. The range is 30-300; the default is 120 seconds.

 recharge
   Sets the number of minutes of recharge time required for each minute of
   battery runtime. This entry is optional depending on the battery. The
   range is 5-250; the default is 100 minutes, but should be configured based
   on the power supply specifications.

 signals
   Specifies the signals available from the battery. This is a three-digit
   value. The value should be configured based on the power supply
   specification.


   ş   The first digit is 1 if the battery can signal the UPS service upon
       power failure, and 0 if it cannot. The default is 1.

       ş   The second digit is 0 if the battery does not signal the UPS
           service about low power, and 1 if it signals when a specified
           number of minutes of power remains (such as 2 minutes or 5
           minutes) until shutdown. The default is 0.

       ş   The third digit is 1 if the battery can accept a shutoff signal
           from the UPS service, and 0 if it cannot. If the third digit is 1,
           the UPS service does an orderly shutdown of the LAN Manager
           software, and then the battery stops providing backup power to the
           computer. When the battery detects power restoration, it restarts
           the computer. The default is 0.

           NOTE  If neither of the first two digits of signals is set to 1,
           the UPS service will not start.

           voltlevels
   Specifies the voltage levels for the signals listed in the signals entry.
   This is a three-digit value.


   ş   The first digit is 0 if the battery uses a negative voltage, and 1 if
       it uses a positive voltage, to signal the UPS service of a power
       failure. The default is 1.

       ş   The second digit is 0 if the battery uses a negative voltage, and
           1 if it uses a positive voltage, to signal the UPS service that it
           has less than two minutes of power remaining. The default is 0.

       ş   The third digit is 0 if the battery recognizes a negative voltage
           as the shutoff signal, and 1 if it recognizes a positive voltage
           as the shutoff signal. The default is 0.

           NOTE  If the low battery voltage level is not set correctly, the
           Server service will not start.





 The Netlogon Section

 The [netlogon] section determines how servers with user-level security in a
 domain validate logon requests. Workstations do not have this section.

 The [netlogon] section contains the following entries:

 pulse
   Sets the number of seconds between sending update notices when no updates
   are occurring. The pulse option must be available for the primary domain
   controller and must have a value in the LANMAN.INI file or specifed from
   the command line. The option is ignored by other servers in the domain.
   The range is 60-3600; the default is 300 seconds.

 randomize
   Sets the number of seconds during which the backup domain controllers or
   member servers should randomize a request to get updates after receiving a
   notice. This prevents servers from requesting an update at the same time.
   The randomize option must have a value. This entry applies only to primary
   domain controllers. The range is 5-120; the default is 30 seconds.

 scripts
   Sets the path where the Netlogon service looks for the logon scripts. This
   entry applies only to primary and backup domain controllers and must be
   present with a value. The pathname can be absolute or relative to the
   LANMAN directory. The default is REPL\IMPORT\SCRIPTS.

 update
   Is set to yes to synchronize the user accounts database with the primary
   domain controller when the service starts. This entry applies only to
   backup domain controllers and member servers in a domain and is ignored by
   the primary domain controller. Values are yes and no; the default is yes.


 The Remoteboot Section

 The [remoteboot] section controls the service to remotely boot workstations
 from a server. Workstations do not have this section.

 The [remoteboot] section contains the following entries:

 configfile
   Is the name of the MS-DOS boot block configuration file, which contains
   information about network device drivers, the boot block processor, and
   the loader that accesses the boot image file that the Remoteboot service
   uses if it boots MS-DOS workstations. This file is in the directory
   specified by rpldir; otherwise, an absolute pathname must be supplied. The
   default filename is DOSBB.CNF.

 maxthreads
   Is the maximum number of workstations that the server is able to boot
   simultaneously. The server can remote boot any number of workstations, but
   only maxthreads workstations are booted at the same time. Other boot
   requests wait until a thread becomes available. The range is 0 to the
   value of the threads entry in the CONFIG.SYS file; the default is 10
   workstations.

 rpldir
   Sets the path to the remote boot directory. The default is REPL\EXPORT\RPL
   if the server is replicating the RPL directory, or RPL if it is not.

 rpln
   Is the dynamic link library file for the server's network adapter card.
   The value for this option must be three filenames, each ending in .DLL and
   each separated by a space. The value for rpl1 must be

   rpl1 = rplnet1.dll rplnet2.dll rploem.dll

   If the server has two network adapter cards, this entry can be copied and
   the 1 in the entry name changed to 2 (rpl2). The Remoteboot service
   supports up to 12 network adapter cards, which means that LANMAN.INI can
   contain entries rpl1-rpl12.


 The Services Section

 The [services] section lists the pathnames to all the available LAN Manager
 services. The services are the components of LAN Manager, such as the
 Workstation service and the Server service. LAN Manager checks these values
 when you start the service.

 If a pathname used in this section does not start with a drive name or a
 backslash, it is assumed to be relative to the LANMAN directory.

 The [services] section contains the following entries, in the order they are
 listed in the LANMAN.INI file:

 workstation
   Is the pathname of the Workstation service initialization program. The
   value for this entry is SERVICES\WKSTA.EXE.

 server
   Is the pathname of the Server service initialization program. The value
   for this entry depends on the type of Server service. For example, the
   pathname for the full Server service is SERVICES\NETSVINI.EXE. The
   pathname for the Peer service is SERVICES\NETPSINI.EXE.

 messenger
   Is the pathname of the Messenger service initialization program. The value
   for this entry is SERVICES\MSRVINIT.EXE.

 netpopup
   Is the pathname of the message popup program. The value for this entry is
   SERVICES\NETPOPUP.EXE.

 alerter
   Is the pathname of the program that sends administrative alert messages.
   The value for this entry is SERVICES\ALERTER.EXE.

 netrun
   Is the pathname of the net run program. The value for this entry is
   SERVICES\RUNSERVR.EXE.

 replicator
   Is the pathname of the replicator program. The value for this entry is
   SERVICES\REPLICAT.EXE.

 ups
   Is the pathname of the uninterruptible power supply (UPS) service. The
   value for this entry is SERVICES\UPS.EXE.

 netlogon
   Is the pathname of the logon security program. The value for this entry is
   SERVICES\NETLOGON.EXE.

 remoteboot
   Is the pathname of the remoteboot program. The value for this entry is
   SERVICES\RPLSERVR.EXE.

 timesource
   Is the pathname of the Timesource service. The value for this entry is
   SERVICES\TIMESRC.EXE.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The [services] section of the MS-DOS LANMAN.INI file for LAN Manager
 Enhanced has the Workstation, Messenger, and Netpopup services and some
 additional entries. For the additional entries, see the "An MS-DOS File"
 section, later in this appendix.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Sample LANMAN.INI Files

 This section provides two sample files, one for a server, and one for a LAN
 Manager Enhanced workstation. An MS-DOS workstation running LAN Manager
 Basic does have a LANMAN.INI file, but it is very different from the files
 for servers, MS OS/2 workstations, and MS-DOS workstations running LAN
 Manager Enhanced. You should never have to change the LANMAN.INI file for an
 MS-DOS workstation running LAN Manager Basic.


 A Server File

 The following is a sample LANMAN.INI file for a server. A file for an MS
 OS/2 workstation has similar entries, except workstations have only the
 sections [networks], [workstation], [messenger], [netshell], and [services].


   ;  Lan Manager initialization file, for server configuration.

   [networks]
   ; This info is read by redir at device init time. It is
   ; available to apps via NetBiosEnum.

   net1 = netbeui$,0

   [workstation]
     computername = MARIEL

   ; The following parameters generally do not need to be
   ; changed by the user.



   charcount = 16
     chartime = 250
     charwait = 3600
     domain = DOMAIN
     keepconn = 600
     keepsearch = 600
     mailslots = yes
     maxcmds = 16
     maxerrorlog = 100
     maxthreads = 10
     maxwrkcache = 64
     numalerts = 12
     numcharbuf = 10
     numdgrambuf = 14
     numservices = 11
     numworkbuf = 15
     othdomains =
     printbuftime = 90
     sesstimeout = 45
     sizcharbuf = 512
     sizerror = 1024
     sizworkbuf = 4096

   ; The next lines help you to locate bits in the
   ; wrkheuristics entry.
   ;                         1         2         3         4
   ;               01234567890123456789012345678901234567890
   wrkheuristics = 11111111213111111110010111200112210000000

   wrknets = net1
     wrkservices = messenger,netpopup

   [messenger]
     logfile = messages.log
     sizmessbuf = 4096

   [netshell]
     refresh = 15
     remote =
     username = MARIEL

   [server]
     alertnames = LYNNC, MARIEL
     auditing = no
     autodisconnect = -1
     autopath = srvauto.pro
     autoprofile = load
     maxusers = 32
     noauditing =
     security = user
     srvcomment = "Server in lab 305."

   ; The following parameters generally do not need to be
   ; changed by the user. NOTE: srvnets= is represented in
   ; the server info struct as a 16-bit lan mask. Srvnet names
   ; are converted to indexes within [networks] for the named
   ; nets.

   accessalert = 5
     alertsched = 5
     diskalert = 300
     erroralert = 5
     guestacct = GUEST
     logonalert = 5
     maxauditlog = 100
     maxchdevjob = 6
     maxchdevq = 2
     maxchdevs = 2
     maxconnections = 128
     maxlocks = 64
     maxopens = 64
     maxsearches = 50
     maxsessopens = 50
     maxsessreqs = 50
     maxsessvcs = 1
     maxshares = 16
     netioalert = 5
     numadmin = 2
     numbigbuf = 3
     numfiletasks = 1
     numreqbuf = 15
     sizreqbuf = 4096
     srvanndelta = 3000
     srvannounce = 60



   ; The next lines help you to locate bits in the srvheuristics
   entry.
   ;                           1
   ;                 0123456789012345678
     srvheuristics = 1111115111121100133

   srvhidden = no
     srvnets = net1
     srvservices = alerter
     userpath = accounts\userdirs

   [alerter]
     sizalertbuf = 3072

   [netrun]
     maxruns = 3
     runpath =

   [replicator]
     exportlist = DOMAIN
     exportpath = c:\lanman\repl\export
     guardtime = 2
     importlist = DOMAIN
     importpath = c:\lanman\repl\import
     interval = 5
     logon = user
     password =
     pulse = 3
     random = 60
     replicate = IMPORT
     tryuser = yes



   [ups]
     messdelay = 5
     messtime = 120
     recharge = 100
     signals = 100
     voltlevels = 100

   [netlogon]
     pulse = 300
     randomize = 30
     scripts = repl\import\scripts
     update = yes

    [remoteboot]
     configfile = dosbb.cnf
     maxthreads = 10
     rpldir = rpl
     rpl1 = rplnet1.dll rplnet2.dll rploem.dll

   [services]
   ; Correlates name of service to pathname of service program.
   ; The pathname must be either
   ;       1) an absolute path (including the drive
   ;specification)
   ;                       OR
   ;       2) a path relative to the LanMan root

   workstation = services\wksta.exe
     server = services\netsvini.exe
     messenger = services\msrvinit.exe
     netpopup = services\netpopup.exe
     alerter = services\alerter.exe
     netrun = services\runservr.exe
     replicator = services\replicat.exe
     ups = services\ups.exe
     netlogon = services\netlogon.exe
     remoteboot = services\rplservr.exe
     timesource = services\timesrc.exe




 An MS-DOS File

 The following is a sample LANMAN.INI file for a workstation running LAN
 Manager Enhanced.

   ;***********************************************************
   ;* NOTE                                                    *
   ;*                                                         *
   ;* THIS FILE IS USED BY THE ENHANCED VERSION OF MS-DOS     *
   ;* LANMAN WITH API SUPPORT. IF YOU HAVE INSTALLED THE      *
   ;* BASIC VERSION OF MS-DOS LANMAN OR THE ENHANCED VERSION  *
   ;* BUT WITHOUT API SUPPORT, THE SYSTEM USES THE LANMAN.INI *
   ;* IN THE NETPROG DIRECTORY INSTEAD OF THIS ONE.           *
   ;*                                                         *
   ;***********************************************************

   [networks]
     netservices    = chknet, minses

   [workstation]
     wrkservices    = messenger, netpopup
     charcount    = 16
     chartime    = 250
     charwait    = 128
     computername    =
     domain      = DOMAIN
     himem     = no
     keepapis    = yes
     keepconn    = 600
     keepsearch    = 600
     lanroot    = c:\lanman.dos
   ; lim      = YES  ; default behavior is use LIM if detected.
     mailslots    = yes
     maxcmds    = 11
     numbigbuf    = 0
     numcharbuf    = 2
     numdgrambuf    = 3
     nummailslots    = 2
     numresources    = 9
     numservers    = 9
     numservices    = 5
     numviewedservers   = 50
     numworkbuf    = 5
     othdomains    =
     sizbigbuf    = 4096
     sizcharbuf    = 128
     sizworkbuf    = 1024

   ; The next lines help you to locate bits in the
   ; wrkheuristics entry.
   ;                           1         2         3
   ;                 012345678901234567890123456789012
     wrkheuristics = 111121101221200000000000000000000


   [messenger]
     logfile = messages.log
     nummsgnames = 2
     sizmessbuf = 256

   [netshell]
     username = LYNNC

   [services]
     chknet       = netprog\chknet.exe
     minses       = netprog\minses.exe
     workstation  = netprog\netwksta.exe
     messenger    = services\msrv.exe
     netpopup     = services\netpopup.exe
     encrypt      = services\encrypt.exe



 Summary Tables

 The summary tables provide the range and default values for entries in the
 LANMAN.INI file. See descriptions of entries for more information. A value
 of 65535 for an entry means "forever," or "no limit." Some entries can also
 have a value of -1. The -1 value is noted in the discussion of entries that
 can have this value; it usually has a similar effect to 65535, removing a
 limit.


 Networks for MS OS/2

 For information about the values of entries for this section, see "The
 Networks Section for MS OS/2" section, earlier in this appendix.


 Networks for MS-DOS

 For information about the values of entries for this section, see "The
 Networks Section for MS-DOS" section, earlier in this appendix.


 Workstation

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Entry               Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 charcount           bytes               0-65535             16

 chartime            milliseconds        0-65535000          250

 Entry               Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 charwait            seconds             0-65535             3600 {128}

 computername        characters          1-15                Ä

 domain              characters          1-15                DOMAIN

 himem Å             string              yes/no/optional     NO

 keepapis Å          string              yes/no              YES

 keepconn            seconds             1-65535             600

 keepsearch          seconds             1-65535             600

 lanroot Å           pathname            Ä                   C:\LANMAN.DOS

 lim Å               string              yes/no              YES

 Entry               Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 mailslots           Ä                   yes/no              YES

 maxcmds             integer             5-255               16 {11}
                                         minimum = (5 * #
                                         of wrknets)

 maxerrorlog Ø       kilobytes           2 to total disk     100
                                         size

 maxthreads          integer             10-254              10

 maxwrkcache Ø       kilobytes           0-640               64

 numalerts Ø         integer             3-200               12

 numbigbuf Å         integer             0-255               0

 numcharbuf          integer             0-15                10 {2}
 Entry               Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
numcharbuf          integer             0-15                10 {2}

 numdgrambuf         integer             8-112 {3-112}       14 {3}

 nummailslots Å      integer             0-255               2

 numresources Å      integer             1-255               9

 numservers Å        integer             1-255               9

 numservices         integer             4-256 {1-255}       8 {5}

 numviewedserversÅ   integer             0-255               50

 numworkbuf          integer             3-50                15 {5}

 othdomains          domain names        as many as 4        Ä
                                         other domains

 Entry               Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 printbuftime Ø      seconds             0-65535             90

 sesstimeout Ø       seconds             10-65535            45

 sizbigbuf Å         bytes               0-65535             4096

 sizcharbuf          bytes               64-4096             512 {128}

 sizerror Ø          bytes               256-4096            1024

 sizworkbuf          bytes               1024-16384          4096 {1024}
                                         {64-4096}

 wrkheuristics       see commentary      see commentary      Ä

 wrknets             names from          net1 to list from   NET1 {0}
                     [networks]          [networks]
                     {LANA numbers}      {0-254}
 Entry               Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                    {LANA numbers}      {0-254}

 wrkservices         service names       no value to list
                                         from [services],
                                         MESSENGER,
                                         NETPOPUP

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Braces ({ }) indicate defaults or ranges that are different for MS-DOS.

 Å The entry is only for an MS-DOS LANMAN.INI file.

 Ø The entry is only for an MS OS/2 LANMAN.INI file.


 Messenger

 Entry          Units     Range/Value  Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 logfile        pathname  Ä            MESSAGES.LOG

 nummsgnames Å  integer   1-10         2

 sizmessbuf     bytes     512-62000    4096 {256}
                          {128-62000}

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Braces ({ }) indicate defaults or ranges that are different for MS-DOS.

 Å The entry is only for an MS-DOS LANMAN.INI file.


 Netshell

 Entry     Units         Range/Value  Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 refresh   seconds       0-65535      15
 remote    computername  Ä            Ä
 username  characters    1-20         USER
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Ø The entry is only for an MS OS/2 LANMAN.INI file.


 Server

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Entry           Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 accessalert     integer             0-65535             5

 alertnames      usernames           no value to name    Ä
                                     list

 alertsched      minutes             0-65535             5

 Entry           Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 auditing        string              yes/no/event        NO

 autodisconnect  minutes             -1-65535            -1

 autopath        pathname            Ä                   SRVAUTO.PRO

 autoprofile     string              see commentary      LOAD

 diskalert       kilobytes           0-65535             300

 erroralert      integer             0-65535             5

 guestacct       name                as many as 20       GUEST
                                     characters

 logonalert      integer             0-65535             5

 maxauditlog     kilobytes           0-65535             100
 Entry           Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
maxauditlog     kilobytes           0-65535             100

 maxchdevjob     integer             0-65535             6

 maxchdevq       integer             0-65535             2

 maxchdevs       integer             0-16                2

 maxconnections  integer             maxusers to 2000    128

 maxlocks        integer             1-8000              64

 maxopens        integer             1-8000              64

 maxsearches     integer             0-1927              50

 maxsessopens    integer             1 to maxopens       50

 maxsessreqs     integer             1-65535             50
 Entry           Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
maxsessreqs     integer             1-65535             50

 maxsessvcs      integer             1                   1

 maxshares       integer             2-500               16

 maxusers        integer             1-1000              32

 netioalert      integer             0-65535             5

 noauditing      string              see commentary      Ä

 numadmin        integer             0-65535             2

 numbigbuf       integer             0-80                3

 numfiletasks    integer             1-8                 1

 numreqbuf       integer             5-300               15
 Entry           Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
numreqbuf       integer             5-300               15

 security        string              share/user          USER

 sizreqbuf       bytes               1024-32768          4096

 srvanndelta     milliseconds        0-65535             3000

 srvannounce     seconds             0-65535             60

 srvcomment      characters          no value to 48      Ä

 srvheuristics   see commentary      see commentary      Ä

 srvhidden       string              yes/no              NO

 srvnets         names from          net1 to list from   NET1
                 [networks]          [networks]

 Entry           Units               Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 srvservices     service names       no value to list    ALERTER
                                     from [services]

 userpath        pathname            Ä                   ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Alerter

 Entry Units Range/Value Default

 sizalertbuf bytes 512-16384 3072


 Netrun

 Entry Units Range/Value Default

 maxruns integer 1-10 3

 runpath pathname Ä Ä


 Replicator

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Entry       Units        Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 exportlist  names        0-32                0
 exportpath  pathname     Ä                   REPL\EXPORT
 guardtime   minutes      0 to (interval/2)   2
 importlist  servernames  0-32                0
 importpath  pathname     Ä                   REPL\IMPORT
 interval    minutes      1-60                5
 logon       username     Ä                   Ä
 password    password     Ä                   Ä
 Entry       Units        Range/Value         Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
password    password     Ä                   Ä
 pulse       integer      1-10                3
 random      seconds      1-120               60
 replicate   Ä            import/export/both  IMPORT
 tryuser     Ä            yes/no              YES
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 UPS

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Entry        Units           Range/Value  Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 batterytime  seconds         0-28800      60
 cmdfile      pathname        Ä            Ä
 messdelay    seconds         0-120        5
 messtime     seconds         30-300       120
 recharge     minutes         5-250        100
 Entry        Units           Range/Value  Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
recharge     minutes         5-250        100
 signals      see commentary  Ä            100
 voltlevels   see commentary  Ä            100
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Netlogon

 Entry Units Range/Value Default

 pulse seconds 60-3600 300

 randomize seconds 5-120 30

 scripts pathname Ä REPL\IMPORT\SCRIPTS

 update Ä yes/no YES


 Remoteboot

 Entry       Units                 Range/Value     Default
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 configfile  filename or pathname  Ä               DOSBB.CNF
 maxthreads  integer               see commentary  10
 rpldir      pathname              Ä               RPL
 rpln        see commentary        RPL1-RPL12      Ä
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Services

 For information about the values of entries for this section, see "The
 Services Section," earlier in this appendix.






 Appendix C  Country Codes
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 A country code in a user account defines the language in which messages are
 sent from a server to a user. Messages such as print notifications and
 alerts are sent from a server to a user's workstation. The country code does
 not affect the language of error messages and explanation messages generated
 by the workstation itself.

 The following table lists available country codes. The default value for the
 country code is 0. If the default value is specified, messages are sent in
 the language used in the LANMAN\NETPROG\NET.MSG file.

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Country    Code  Country         Code
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Asia       099   Latin America   003
 Australia  061   Netherlands     031
 Belgium    032   Norway          047
 Canada     002   Portugal        351
 Country    Code  Country         Code
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Canada     002   Portugal        351
 Denmark    045   Spain           034
 Finland    358   Sweden          046
 France     033   Switzerland     041
 Germany    049   United Kingdom  044
 Italy      039   United States   001
 Japan      081
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ








 Glossary
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 10 User Pak
 See Additional User Pak.

 Absolute path
 A pathname whose reference to a file or directory does not depend on the
 current drive or directory. An absolute path must start with a drive letter,
 a colon, and a backslash ( \ ). See also Network path, Path, Pathname, and
 Relative path.

 Account
 See User account.

 Accounts database
 See User accounts database.

 Additional User Pak
 An optional server modification that expands the number of users that can
 connect to a server. A server without Additional User Paks has a limit of
 five users. A 10 User Pak adds 10 users to the server's capacity. An
 Unlimited User Pak allows an unlimited number of users to access the server.
 Six 10 User Paks are equivalent to an Unlimited User Pak.

 ADMIN$
 An administrative resource that enables remote administration on servers.
 See also IPC$.

 Admin privilege
 A privilege level that allows a user at a server to issue all types of
 administrative commands and use all the resources shared on that server,
 regardless of the access permissions for the user. User accounts with admin
 privilege are part of the special group admins. See also Permissions and
 Privilege level.

 Alerter service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a server to send error messages and
 special alert messages to a designated list of users. Alert messages provide
 warnings about problems with security and access, user sessions, and
 printers.

 Alias
 A username, computername, or other alias that can receive messages. Each
 workstation's computername is automatically added to its list of    aliases.
 Other aliases can be added with the net name command. An alias is not the
 same as a username, although a username can be used as an alias.

 Argument
 A value or values supplied in a command string.

 Audit
 The process in which LAN Manager records an entry in the audit trail
 whenever a user accesses a resource in a certain way or logs on to the
 network. An audit trail entry includes the username, the type of resource,
 and the data and time of use.

 Audit trail
 A file that contains audit entries. See also Audit and Log.

 Backup domain controller
 A server in a domain that keeps and uses a copy of the domain's user
 accounts database to validate logon requests. See also Member server,
 Netlogon service, and  Primary domain controller.

 Batch program
 A file containing commands that are carried out when the file runs. MS OS/2
 batch programs have the filename extension . CMD. MS-DOS batch programs have
 the filename extension .BAT.

 Boot image file
 See Image file.

 Broadcast message
 A message you can send to all users on the local-area network. You can also
 send a message to all users within a domain. See also Messenger service.

 Cache
 A buffer used to hold data during input/output (I/O) transfers between disk
 and random access memory (RAM).

 Comm queue
 See Communication-device queue.

 \COMM resource
 A communication-device queue.

 Communication device
 A COM or LPT connection on the local computer. Communication devices include
 modems, image scanners, and serial printers.

 Communication-device queue
 A queue that stores communication-device requests, and then sends them one
 by one to one or more communication devices. See also Pool and Unspooled.

 Connection
 The software link between a workstation and a shared resource on a server. A
 connection can be made by assigning a local devicename on the workstation to
 a resource shared on a server. A connection also can be made when the
 resource is accessed by using a network pathname with a command-line command
 or from an application. See also Devicename, Network path, and Session.

 Console version of the LAN Manager Screen
 A version of the LAN Manager Screen that allows users to monitor and control
 printers and other devices at a server, and prevents other uses of the
 server.

 Core server
 A non-LAN Manager server. LAN Manager workstations can connect to a core
 server's resources, but can neither view the resources nor control the
 queues.

 Country code
 A code in the user's account that specifies the language in which the server
 sends messages.

 Default
 A value coded into the LAN Manager software. For LANMAN.INI entries, the
 default value of an entry is assumed when the entry is missing from
 LANMAN.INI.

 Default  permissions
 The permissions assigned to the parent directory or drive if no permissions
 are assigned for a directory or file. If no permissions are assigned for a
 communication-device queue, named pipe, or printer queue, the default
 permissions are the permissions assigned to the resource (\COMM, \PIPE, or
 \PRINT).

 Device
 A piece of hardware that is attached to a computer, for example, a disk
 drive, printer, or communication device.

 Devicename
 The name by which a computer identifies a printer, disk, or other device.
 Disk devices are identified by a drive letter followed by a colon (for
 example, C:). Printers, modems, and other devices are identified by the port
 to which they are attached (for example, LPT1 or COM2).

 Directory tree
 The path for a directory and the names of its subdirectories. To display a
 directory tree, use the MS OS/2 or MS-DOS tree command. See also Path.

 Disk resource
 A shared disk device. With LAN Manager, a drive, a partition, a directory
 tree, or a single directory can be shared as a disk resource. See also
 Devicename.

 Domain
 A combination of servers and workstations that are grouped to create an
 administrative unit.

 Drive duplexing
 A fault-tolerance feature that sets up a primary partition and a secondary
 partition with identical data using separate disk controllers. Drive
 duplexing provides protection against errors caused by a faulty controller.
 Drive duplexing is available only for computers with the high-performance
 file system (HPFS). See also Drive mirroring, Primary partition, and
 Secondary partition.

 Drive mirroring
 A fault-tolerance feature that sets up a primary partition and a secondary
 partition on two disks using the same disk controller. The operating system
 treats these partitions as a single logical drive. Data lost from one
 partition is recovered from the other. Drive mirroring is available only for
 computers with the high-performance file system (HPFS). See also Drive
 duplexing, Primary partition, and Secondary partition.

 Entry
 An item in the LANMAN.INI file. See also Option.

 Error alert
 A message from LAN Manager about local-area network or system errors. These
 messages are stored in the error log. See also Alerter service and Log.

 Error log
 A file that stores error messages. See also Log.

 Error message
 A message that appears on the computer screen after LAN Manager or the
 operating system detects a problem while trying to process an operation or
 command.

 Events
 Uses of a server and its resources for which an audit trail can be
 specified. See also Audit.

 FAT file system
 See File allocation table (FAT).

 Fault monitoring
 A fault-tolerance feature that detects disk errors, logs them, and alerts
 administrators when errors occur.

 Fault-tolerance system
 A LAN Manager system that uses drive duplication and monitoring to prevent
 the corruption or loss of a computer's data. See also Drive duplexing, Drive
 mirroring, and Fault monitoring.

 FCB
 File control block.

 File allocation table (FAT)
 An MS OS/2 and MS-DOS file system that tracks the location of files in
 directories. The file allocation table also allocates free space on disks to
 ensure space is available for new files. MS OS/2 1.2 can replace the FAT
 file system with an installable file system (IFS), such as the
 high-performance file system (HPFS).

 File attributes
 Attributes assigned to MS OS/2 files and directories that take precedence
 over LAN Manager permissions. These attributes are read-only, hidden,
 system, and archive.

 Ftadmin
 A LAN Manager utility that starts the fault-tolerance system. See also
 Fault-tolerance system.

 Ftmonit
 A LAN Manager utility that controls the fault-tolerance system's
 error-monitoring feature. See also Fault monitoring and Fault-tolerance
 system.

 Ftsetup
 A LAN Manager utility that installs the fault-tolerance system and
 configures drive mirroring and drive duplexing. See also Drive duplexing,
 Drive mirroring, Fault monitoring, and Fault-tolerance.

 Group
 With user-level security, a set of users (with user accounts) who share
 common permissions for one or more resources. Individually assigned user
 permissions take precedence over those assigned through groups.

 Guest privilege
 A privilege level that allows a user to use local-area network resources,
 view information about a server's shared resources and the status of printer
 and communication-device queues, and send and receive messages. See also
 Permissions and Privilege level.

 Heuristics
 Entries in the LANMAN.INI file that determine how information is sent or
 received over the local-area network. The values for the entries are numbers
 that control aspects of performance, data transfer, and protocols.

 High-performance file system (HPFS)
 An MS OS/2 file system that has faster input/output (I/O) than the FAT file
 system, does not restrict file naming to eight characters with a
 three-character extension, and is compatible with the file allocation table
 (FAT) file system. When you install LAN Manager server software on an HPFS
 partition, it becomes an HPFS386 partition. See also File allocation table
 (FAT).

 High-performance file system 386 (HPFS 386)
 An enhanced version of the high-performance file system designed to work
 with a 386 computer. HPFS386 includes an enhanced disk cache for servers and
 local security. See also High-performance file system (HPFS).

 Home directory
 A directory assigned to a user on a server with user-level security.

 HPFS
 See High-performance file system (HPFS).

 HPFS386
 See High-performance file system 386 (HPFS386).

 Image file
 A file that provides all of the programs needed to start an MS-DOS computer
 from a server running the Remoteboot service. The image file is used as a
 startup drive for MS-DOS workstations.

 Initialization file
 See LANMAN.INI.

 IOCtl
 Input/output controls.

 IPC$
 An administrative resource that controls how interprocess communication
 works on servers. See also ADMIN$ and Named pipe.

 LANMAN.INI
 The LAN Manager initialization file. The values in this file determine the
 option settings for computers on the local-area network, although the net
 start and  net config command options can temporarily override LANMAN.INI
 values. These values can be modified to suit the network requirements. See
 also Default.

 Lazy write
 To store data in a cache and write the data to the disk as a background
 activity during disk idle time.

 Local
 See Local server.

 Local-area network (LAN)
 A grouping of computers, connected by cable or other physical media, that
 lets users share information and equipment.

 Local security
 A security method available for 386 servers running high-performance file
 system (HPFS386). This method extends LAN Manager security measures to
 protect the files on a server by restricting access for the users working at
 the server. With local security, a user must be assigned permissions to
 access any file or directory in an HPFS386 volume, whether or not the
 resource is shared as part of a LAN Manager resource.

 Local server
 The server at which the user or administrator is currently working. See also
 Remote server.

 Log
 A history file. LAN Manager, by default, maintains an error log, a message
 log, and an audit trail.

 Log off
 To remove the username and password from a workstation, canceling
 connections to local-area network resources, but not stopping LAN Manager
 services.

 Log on
 To provide a username and password to gain access to the local-area network.
 When connecting to resources, LAN Manager validates the username and
 password before granting access.

 Logical drive
 Anything given a drive designation (for example, D:). This can be a disk
 partition; a workstation's redirected drive, which makes a connection to a
 remote disk resource; or a primary and secondary partition pair for a
 mirrored or duplexed drive.

 Logon script
 A batch program containing LAN Manager and operating system commands used to
 configure workstations. Logon scripts can be written for one or more users.
 When the user logs on, the logon script runs at the user's workstation.

 Member server
 A server in a domain that keeps and uses a copy of the domain's user
 accounts database but does not validate logon requests. See also Backup
 domain controller, Netlogon service, and Primary domain controller.

 Message logging
 To save messages received by a workstation in a file or to print them on a
 local device.

 Messenger service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a workstation or server to receive
 messages from other local-area network users. This service can also store
 messages in a log file.

 Mirrored drive
 A hard disk drive partition whose data has been copied to another hard disk
 through the fault-tolerance system. A mirrored drive consists of a pair of
 partitions (a primary and secondary partition) that appear as a single
 logical drive to the operating system. See also Drive duplexing and Drive
 mirroring.

 MPX
 Multiplex.

 MS OS/2
 Microsoft Operating System/2. The operating system that supports LAN Manager
 servers and some LAN Manager workstations.

 MS-DOS
 Microsoft Disk Operating System. The operating system that supports some LAN
 Manager workstations.

 Named pipe
 A connection used to transfer data between separate processes, usually on
 separate computers. Named pipes are the foundation of interprocess
 communication (IPC). An administrator can set permissions on named pipes,
 but only LAN Manager and network applications can create them. See also
 IPC$.

 Netlogon service
 A LAN Manager service that implements logon security. When a server in the
 domain runs the Netlogon service, the username and password supplied by each
 user who attempts to log on in the domain are checked. All servers
 participating in logon security run the Netlogon service; the Netlogon
 service replicates a domainwide user accounts database to these servers. See
 also Backup domain controller, Member server, Primary domain controller, and
  Standalone server.

 Netpopup service
 A LAN Manager service that displays messages on the computer screen when
 they arrive from other local-area network users or from LAN Manager.

 Netrun service
 A LAN Manager service that lets users, from their own workstations, run
 programs that are in the run path on a server.

 Network path
 The computername of a server followed by the sharename of a shared resource.
 A server's computername is preceded by two backslashes (\\) and a sharename
 is preceded by one backslash (for example, \\SALES\REPORT). See also
 Resource and Sharename.

 Operator privilege
 A privilege granted to a user that allows the user to perform certain
 administrative tasks. There are four types of operator privilege: accounts
 operator, comm operator, print operator, and server operator.

 Option
 Part of a command that determines how the command or service works; it is
 not required. See also Entry.

 Orphaned drive
 In a mirrored or duplexed pair, a secondary partition for which the primary
 partition is missing. See also Drive duplexing, Drive mirroring, Primary
 partition, and Secondary partition.

 Password
 A word used to access the network or one or more shared resources. See also
 Share-level security and User-level security.

 Path
 A set of directory names that defines a directory's location. A backslash
 (\) precedes each directory name except the top-level one. (For example, the
 path REPORTS\ACCT\NORTH indicates the NORTH directory is in the ACCT
 subdirectory of the REPORTS directory.) An initial backslash indicates that
 the path begins at the drive's root directory. When a path begins with a
 drive letter, it is an absolute path. See also Absolute path, Network path,
 Pathname, and Relative path.

 Pathname
 A path that ends in a filename. A path specifies a directory; a pathname
 specifies a file. A pathname, like a path, can be absolute (containing a
 drive letter) or relative to the current drive and directory. See also
 Absolute path, Network path, Path, and Relative path.

 Peer service
 A LAN Manager service that enables an MS OS/ 2 workstation to share
 directories, one printer queue, and one communication-device queue with one
 other user at a time. The Peer service performs most of the same services as
 the Server service, but on a smaller scale. See also Server service.

 Permissions
 Settings that define the type(s) of action a user can take with a shared
 resource. With user-level security, each user is assigned permissions for
 each resource. With share-level security, each resource is assigned
 permissions, and all users who access the resource have these permissions.

 \PIPE resource
 A named pipe.

 Pool
 A group of printers or communication devices that receive requests from the
 same queue.

 Primary domain controller
 The server at which the master copy of a domain's user accounts database is
 maintained. The primary domain controller also validates logon requests. See
 also Backup domain controller, Member server, and Netlogon service.

 Primary partition
 In drive mirroring or drive duplexing, the main partition in a mirrored or
 duplexed pair. Only the primary partition is visible to the operating
 system. See also Drive duplexing, Drive mirroring, and Secondary partition.

 \PRINT resource
 A printer queue.

 Print job
 A document waiting in a printer queue.

 Printer queue
 A queue that stores print jobs, and then sends them one by one to a printer
 or pool. See also Pool and Spooled.

 Privilege level
 With user-level security, one of three settingsÄuser, admin, or
 guestÄassigned for each user account. The privilege level defines the range
 of actions a user can perform on the network. See also Admin privilege,
 Guest privilege, Operator privilege, Permissions, and User privilege.

 Profile
 A file containing LAN Manager commands that share and configure server
 resources and make connections to network resources.

 Queue
 See Communication-device queue and Printer queue.

 RAW
 Read and write.

 Redirect
 To change the default path of data traffic.

 Relative path
 A path relative to the current drive and directory. For example, from the
 C:\LANMAN directory, a relative path to the directory C:\LANMAN\ACCOUNTS is
 simply ACCOUNTS. See also Absolute path, Network path, Path, and Pathname.

 Remote
 See Remote server.

 Remote server
 A server that is not located where the user or administrator is currently
 working. See also Local server.

 Remoteboot service
 A LAN Manager service that provides software support for booting MS OS/2 and
 MS-DOS workstations over the local-area network.

 Replicator service
 A LAN Manager service that maintains identical sets of files and directories
 on different servers and MS OS/2 workstations.

 Resource
 Any disk drive or directory, printer, modem, image scanner, or other
 equipment that a server can share over a local-area network. LAN Manager
 also has administrative resources, which govern how certain processes work
 on each server. See also Communication-device queue, Disk resource, Printer
 queue, and Shared resource.

 Role
 See Server role.

 Script
 See Logon script.

 Secondary partition
 In drive mirroring or drive duplexing, the drive that duplicates data on the
 primary partition. The secondary partition is invisible to the operating
 system, which sees the primary and secondary partitions as a single logical
 drive. See also Drive duplexing, Drive mirroring, Fault-tolerance, and
 Primary partition.

 Separator page
 One or more cover sheets that are printed before a print job. LAN Manager
 provides a default separator page, DEFAULT.SEP, for use with shared printer
 queues. Custom separator pages can also be used.

 Server role
 The role assigned to a server that determines how the Netlogon service works
 on the server. The server role can be backup domain controller, member
 server, primary domain controller, or standalone server. See also Backup
 domain controller, Member server, Netlogon service, Primary domain
 controller, and Standalone server.

 Server service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a computer to share resources on the
 network and provides administrators with tools for controlling and
 monitoring resource use. See also Peer service.

 Services
 The main components of the LAN Manager software. The basic service is the
 Workstation service, which lets a computer use local-area network resources.
 The Workstation service must be running for any other service to run. The
 Server service enables a computer to share resources over the network. Other
 services include the Alerter, Messenger, Netlogon, Netpopup, Netrun, Peer,
 Remoteboot, Replicator, Timesource, and UPS services.

 Session
 A link between a workstation and a server. A session consists of one or more
 connections to shared resources. See also Connection.

 Setup program
 The program that installs LAN Manager software on a workstation or server.
 During installation, the Setup program is copied to the computer's hard disk
 for later use in managing the computer's configuration.

 Shared resource
 A resource on a server that has been made available to network users. See
 also Resource.

 Shared queue
 See Communication-device queue and Printer queue.

 Share-level security
 A type of security that limits access to each shared resource by requiring a
 password. Permissions are assigned to the resource (rather than to the
 user). All users who know the password can use the resource within the
 bounds of the permissions assigned for the resource. See also Password,
 Permissions, and User-level security.

 Sharename
 The name given to a resource when it is shared on the local-area network.
 Each shared resource is identified by its sharename. No two resources on a
 server can have the same sharename. See also Network path.

 SMB
 Server message block.

 Spooled
 The type of queue used with printers configured with a parallel interface.
 See also Devicename and Printer queue.

 Standalone logon
 A logon request that is not validated by a logon server. In domains without
 logon security, each logon request is granted as standalone logon. In
 domains with logon security, a logon request with a username that is not
 found in the domain's user accounts database is granted standalone logon.

 Standalone server
 A server with user-level security that has its own user accounts database
 and does not participate in domain logon verification.

 Statistics log
 A detailed list of server access and workstation use provided by the net
 statistics command.

 Timesource service
 A LAN Manager service that identifies a server as the time source for a
 domain. Other computers can synchronize their clocks with the time source.

 UNC
 See Network path and Universal naming convention (UNC).

 Uninterruptible power supply (UPS)
 A battery, attached to a server's serial port, that provides backup power
 for conducting an orderly shutdown if the server's normal power supply
 fails. See also UPS service.

 Universal naming convention (UNC)
 Another term for network path. See also Network path.

 Unlimited User Pak
 See Additional User Pak.

 Unspooled
 A queue used with communication devices and printers configured with a
 serial interface. See also Communication-device queue and Devicename.

 UPS service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a server to use an uninterruptible power
 supply (UPS). The UPS service protects the server from data loss during a
 power failure. See also Uninterruptible power supply (UPS).

 User account
 A record on a server or in a domain that contains information about the user
 and identifies the user to LAN Manager.

 User accounts database
 The NET.ACC file stored in the LANMAN\ACCOUNTS directory. This file contains
 the user accounts and groups that have been established. See also Group and
 User account.

 User Pak
 See Additional User Pak.

 User privilege
 A privilege that allows a person to use local-area network resources, view
 information about a server's shared resources and the status of printer and
 communication-device queues, and send and receive messages. See also
 Permissions and Privilege level.

 User-level security
 A type of security in which a user account is set up for each user.
 Permissions are then granted to each user for specific resources, defining
 exactly what actions each user can take with each resource. See also
 Password and Share-level security.

 Username
 The name by which a user is identified on the local-area network.

 Utility
 A LAN Manager program that provides maintenance and monitoring functions for
 the local-area network.

 VC
 Virtual circuit.

 Workstation
 A computer from which a person uses resources shared on the local-area
 network.

 Workstation service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a computer to use local-area network
 resources and services. The Workstation service must be running for any
 other service to run.





 INDEX
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




     A
 Abbreviations, command
 Accounts database
   backing up
   restoring
 Accounts directory
 Accounts operator
 Accounts, user
   converting with portacc
 Accounts
   changing a password for a user account
   groups
     displaying
     modifying
   guest
   logon requirements
   password requirements
   user
     displaying information about
     modifying
 Admin privilege
 ADMIN$
   sharing
 Administrative resource
   sharing
 Alerter service
   modifying
   starting
 Alerter
 {alerter}
   sizalertbuf
   summary table
 Alias
   adding
   deleting
   displaying a list of
   using to forward messages
 ASCII text
   copying
 Asterisk (*) to initiate password prompt
 At utility
 Audit options
   displaying
   modifying
 Audit trail
   backing up
   clearing
   displaying
   restoring
 Audited events
   specifying
 Auditing
   canceling
   for a server with share-level security
   for a server with user-level security
   starting
     automatically

     B
 Backacc utility
 Backup domain controller
 Basic directory for LANMAN.DOS Basic
 .BAT files
 Batch programs
 Battery, using
 Batterytime
 Binary format
   copying
 Boot image
   creating file
 Broadcasting messages

     C
 Cache utility
 Chkstor utility
 Clock, workstation
   synchronizing
 .CMD files
 Cmdfile
 Comm operator
 \COMM
 Command abbreviations
 Command list
 Command processor
   starting on remote server
 Commands, net
   abbreviating
   expediting
   list of
   net access
   net accounts
   net admin
     using for remote administration
   net audit
   net comm
   net config peer
   net config server
   net config workstation
   net config
   net console
   net continue
   net copy
   net device
   net error
   net file
   net forward
   net group
   net help
   net helpmsg
   net load
   net log
   net logoff
   net logon
   net move
   net name
   net password
   net pause
   net print
   net run
   net save
   net send
   net separator
   net session
   net share
   net start alerter
   net start messenger
   net start netlogon
   net start netpopup
   net start netrun
   net start peer
   net start remoteboot
   net start replicator
   net start server
   net start timesource
   net start ups
   net start workstation
   net start
   net statistics
   net status
   net stop
   net time
   net use
   net user
   net view
   net who
   net
   using special characters
 Commands
   scheduling;command to run on server
 Communication device
   displaying information about
   sharing
 Communication-device queue
   connecting to
   controlling
   disconnecting from
   displaying information about
   sharing
 Communication-device request
   controlling
 Computername
 Configfile
 Configuration settings
   displaying
 Configuration values
 Configuration, cache
   displaying
 Connections
   canceling
   continuing
   displaying
   getting information about
   pausing
   server
     loading
     saving
   workstation
     loading
     saving
 Console screen
   starting
 Contents of manual
 Continuing
   printer
   services
 Conventions, notational
   for the LANMAN.INI file
 Copying directories
 Copying files
 Country codes

     D
 Data loss
   protecting against
 Default share
   PUBLIC directory
 Default value
   LANMAN.INI
 DEFAULT.SEP
 Detached program
 Device name
 Directories
   connecting to
   copying
   disconnecting from
   home directory
     checking storage limits
   LANMAN
   maintaining identical sets
   sharing
   Users
 Disk errors
   monitoring
 DOCUPDAT directory
 Domain name
   displaying
   specifying
 Domain
   designating server as time source for
   displaying time for
   displaying usernames
   logon
   server roles
   specifying
 DOSBB.CNF
 Drive duplexing
 Drive mirroring
 DRIVERS directory for LANMAN.DOS Enhanced
 DRIVERS directory
 Drivers directory

     E
 Error log
   changing the size
   clearing
   displaying
 Error messages
   from a program
     displaying
   getting help with
 Error monitoring
   modifying
 Errpopup utility
 Export server
 Exportlist
 Exportpath

     F
 FAT permissions
   backing up
   restoring
 Fault-tolerance utility
   error monitoring
   installing
   modifying
   starting
 File locks
   displaying number of
   removing
 Files
   closing
   controlling shared files
   copying
   displaying open files
   ID number, displaying
   image
     creating
   initialization
     LANMAN.INI
   maintaining identical sets of
   moving
 Forwarding messages
 Ftadmin utility
 Ftmonit utility
 Ftsetup utility

     G
 Groups
   displaying
   modifying
   permissions
   servers
 Guardtime
 Guest account
 Guest name
 Guest privilege

     H
 Help
   getting help for commands and topics
   getting help with error messages
 Heuristics
   for a server
   for MS OS/2
   for MS-DOS
 Hidden server
 Home directory
   checking storage limits
 HPFS386
   file system caching
   permissions
     backing up
     restoring
   securing for local access

     I
 Image file
   creating
 Import server
 Importlist
 Importpath
 Interval
 Inverter shutdown
 IPC$
   sharing

     J
 Job number
   finding

     L
 LAN Manager manual set
 LAN Manager Screen
   console version
     starting
   for administrators
     starting
   for users
     starting
 LANMAN directory
 LANMAN.DOS Basic directory
 LANMAN.DOS Enhanced directory
 LANMAN.INI
   changing values
   notational conventions
   overriding values
   pathname
   samples
     for a server
     for MS-DOS
   sections
     {alerter}
     {netlogon}
     {netrun}
     {remoteboot}
     {replicator}
     {services}
     {ups}
   summary tables
   using a default value
   values for options
 Lazy writes
 Local security
   and privileged processes
   canceling
   logging off from a server
   logging on at a server
 Locks
   file locks
 Logging off from a server with local security
 Logging off from the network
 Logging on at a server with local security
   without starting the network
 Logging on to the network
 Logoff utility
 Logon domain
 Logon hours
 Logon requirements
   displaying
   modifying
 LOGON scripts
 Logon scripts
   setting pathname
 Logon server
   specifying
 Logon utility
 Logon verification
 Logon
 LOGS directory for LANMAN.DOS Enhanced
 LOGS directory

     M
 Makeimg utility
 Manual contents
 Manual set, LAN Manager
 Maxruns
 Maxthreads
 Member server
 Message log
   controlling
   displaying information about
 Messages
   alert
   alias
   broadcasting
   displaying
   forwarding
   printing
   receiving
   sending
 Messdelay
 Messenger service
   modifying
   starting
 Messenger
 {messenger}
   summary table
 Messtime
 More command
 Moving files
 MS OS/2 compatibility mode
 MS OS/2
   escape character
   heuristics
   LANMAN directory
   more command
   using special characters with LAN Manager commands
 MS-DOS LANMAN.DOS Enhanced directory
 MS-DOS
   creating boot image file
   heuristics
   LANMAN.DOS Basic directory
   LANMAN.DOS Enhanced directory
   LANMAN.INI file sample
   more command

     N
 Net access
 Net accounts
 Net admin
   using for remote administration
 Net audit
 Net comm
 Net command
   abbreviating
 Net commands
   list of
 Net config peer
 Net config server
 Net config workstation
 Net config
 Net console
 Net continue
 Net copy
 Net device
 Net error
 Net file
 Net forward
 Net group
 Net help
 Net helpmsg
 Net load
 Net log
 Net logoff
 Net logon
 Net move
 Net name
 Net password
 Net pause
 Net print
 Net run
 Net save
 Net send
 Net separator
 Net session
 Net share
 Net start alerter
 Net start messenger
 Net start netlogon
 Net start netpopup
 Net start netrun
 Net start peer
 Net start remoteboot
 Net start replicator
 Net start server
 Net start timesource
 Net start ups
 Net start workstation
 Net start
 Net statistics
 Net status
 Net stop
 Net time
 Net use
 Net user
 Net utilities, list
 Net view
 Net who
 Net
 NET.ACC
   backing up
   restoring
 NET.AUD
   backing up
   restoring
 NET.ERR
 NetBIOS driver
 NETLIB directory
 Netlogon service
   continuing
   modifying
   pausing
   starting
 Netlogon
 NETLOGON.PRO
 {netlogon}
   pulse
   randomize
   scripts
   summary table
   update
 Netpopup service
   starting
 Netpopup
 NETPROG directory for LANMAN.DOS Enhanced
 NETPROG directory
 Netrun service
   continuing
   modifying
   pausing
   starting
 Netrun
 {netrun}
   maxruns
   runpath
   summary table
 {netshell}
   summary table
 Network adapter card
   specifying for a computer
 Network
   displaying usernames
 /No option
 Notational conventions
   for the LANMAN.INI file

     O
 Operator privilege
 Options
   /no
   /yes

     P
 Password requirements
   displaying
   modifying
 Password
   asterisk (*) to initiate password prompt
   changing
 Pathname for LANMAN.INI
 Pausing
   printer
   services
 Peer service
   continuing
   displaying configuration
   modifying
     while it's running
   pausing
   starting
 Permissions
   assigning for resources
   backing up
   for a resource
     modifying
   groups
   restoring
 \PIPE
 Portacc utility
 Power failure
   protecting against
 Primary domain controller
 Print job
   controlling
   displaying
   finding identification number
   separator page
     canceling
     using
 Print operator
 \PRINT
 Printer queue
   connecting to
   controlling
   disconnecting from
   displaying contents of
   modifying options for
   separator page
     canceling
     using
   setting options for
   setting priority level
   sharing
   using a remote printer
   using a separator page
 Printer
    displaying informationabout
   continuing paused network connection
   copying files to
   pausing a network connection
   separator page
     canceling
   sharing
   using a local printer
 Printing messages
 Priority level
   setting for a printer queue
 Priv utility
 Privilege
 Privileged process
 PRN:
 Profile
   loading
   saving
   server
     loading and saving automatically
     saving
     setting path
     specifying path
   workstation
 PROFILES directory for LANMAN.DOS Enhanced
 PROFILES directory
 Program
   detached
   displaying error messages
   running
     on a server
   scheduling to run on server
 PUBLIC directory
 Pulse

     R
 Random
 Randomize
 Reactivating
   printer
   services
 Recharge
 Redirection
 Remote administration
   net admin
 Remote server
   accessing
 Remoteboot service
   canceling for a workstation
   image file for MS-DOS
   modifying
   starting
     on a workstation
 Remoteboot
 {remoteboot}
   configfile
   maxthreads
   rpln
   rpldir
   summary table
 REPL directory
 REPL$
 REPL.INI
 Replication
   controlling
   modifying
 Replicator service
   modifying
   starting
 Replicator
 {replicator}
   exportlist
   exportpath
   guardtime
   importlist
   importpath
   interval
   logon
   password
   pulse
   random
   replicate
   summary table
   tryuser
 Resource access
   controlling
   permissions
 Resource
   accessing without starting the network
   connecting to
   creating
   deleting
   disconnecting from
   displaying
     information about
     list of
   listing of
   saving share definitions
   sharing
   using
 Restacc utility
 RPL directory
 Rpln
 Rpldir
 Rpldsabl utility
 Rplenabl utility
 RPLUSER directory
 Runpath

     S
 Scheduling
   programs to run on server
 Screen display
   controlling
 Scripts
 SECURESH.EXE utility
 Security
 Separator page
   canceling
   using
 Server operator
 Server service
   continuing
   displaying configuration
   modifying
     while it's running
   pausing
   starting
   stopping
 Server
   configuration settings
     display
   designating time source
   disk space
     checking
   displaying
     list of shared resources
     list of
     resources on
     who is logged on at
   export
   heuristics
   hidden
   home directories
     checking storage limits
   import
   LANMAN directory
   LANMAN.INI
     file sample
   logging on at a server without starting the network
   profile
     setting path
   protecting against data loss
   remote
   replicating files
   role
     setting
   running a program on
   runpath
   scheduling commands and programs
   securing HPFS386 for local access
   session with workstation
   setting security type
   time
     displaying
   using to start a workstation
   with local security
     logging off
     logging on
     using privileged processes
 Servers group
 {server}
   summary table
 SERVICES directory for LANMAN.DOS Enhanced
 SERVICES directory
 Services
   Alerter
   continuing a paused service
   displaying a list of
     running services
   Messenger
   modifying while running
   Netlogon
   Netpopup
   Netrun
   pausing a service
   Peer
   Remoteboot
   Replicator
   Server
   starting
   stopping
   Timesource
   UPS
   Workstation
 {services}
   alerter
   messenger
   netlogon
   netpopup
   netrun
   remoteboot
   replicator
   server
   timesource
   ups
   workstation
 Session
   between server and workstation
     disconnecting
     displaying list
 Share definitions
   loading
   saving
 Share-level security
   assigning permissions
   auditing
   setting
 Sharing resources
 Signals
 Sizalertbuf
 Special characters
   using with commands
 SRVAUTO.PRO
 Standalone server
 Statistics log
   clearing
 Statistics
   cache
     clearing
     displaying
   configuration settings
     display
   displaying
 Stopping services
 Syntax notation

     T
 Time server
   using
 Time source
   designating server as
 Time
   synchronizing clocks
 Timesource service
   starting
 Tryuser

     U
 Update
 UPS service
   modifying
   starting
 Ups
 {ups}
   batterytime
   cmdfile
   messdelay
   messtime
   recharge
   signals
   summary table
   voltlevels
 User account
   activating
   changing a password
   creating
   deactivating
   displaying information about
   home directory
   modifying
   setting expiration date
   specifying logon server
 User accounts database
   converting 1.x to 2.0
 User privilege
 User-level security
   auditing
   changing a password
   setting
   user accounts
     displaying information about
     modifying
 USERDIRS
 Username
 Users logged on to the network
   displaying who
 Users
   getting information about
 Utilities
   at
   backacc
   cache
   chkstor
   errpopup
   ftadmin
   ftmonit
   ftsetup
   list of
   logoff
   logon
   makeimg
   portacc
   priv
   restacc
   rpldsabl
   rplenabl
   SECURESH.EXE

     V
 Values
   changing
   configuring
   default
     LANMAN.INI
   overriding
 Voltlevels

     W
 Who is logged on
   displaying
 Workstation profile
 Workstation service
   continuing
   displaying configuration
   modifying
     while it's running
   pausing
   starting
   stopping
 Workstation
   booting remotely
   canceling the Remoteboot service
   clock, synchronizing
   computername
   connecting to a resource
   connections
     displaying
   disconnecting from a resource
   displaying who is logged on at
   MS OS/2 LANMAN directory
   MS-DOS Basic directory
   MS-DOS LANMAN.DOS Enhanced directory
   MS-DOS
     LANMAN.INI file sample
   running the Peer service
   session with server
   sharing
     directories
     files
     one communication-device
     one printer
   starting from the server
   starting the Remoteboot service
 {workstation}
   summary table

     Y
 /Yes option

