 Microsoft LAN Manager - User's Guide for MS-DOS








 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
            Microsoft(R) LAN Manager - User's Guide for MS-DOS(R)

                                 VERSION 2.0
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


                            Microsoft Corporation







 Information in this document is subject to change without notice and does
 not represent a commitment on the part of Microsoft Corporation. The
 software described in this document is furnished under a license agreement
 or nondisclosure agreement. The software may be used or copied only in
 accordance with the terms of the agreement. It is against the law to copy
 the software on any medium except as specifically allowed in the license or
 nondisclosure agreement. No part of this manual may be reproduced or
 transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
 photocopying and recording, for any purpose without the express written
 permission of Microsoft Corporation.  U.S. Government Restricted Rights  The
 SOFTWARE and Documentation are provided with RESTRICTED RIGHTS. Use,
 duplication, or disclosure by the Government is subject to restrictions as
 set forth in subparagraph (c) (1) (ii) of The Rights in Technical Data and
 Computer Software clause at 252.227-7013 or paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of
 Commercial Computer DocumentationÄRestricted Rights at 48 CFR 52.227-19, as
 applicable. Contractor/Manufacturer is Microsoft Corporation/One Microsoft
 Way/Redmond, Washington 98052-6399.
 (C)1990 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.


 Printed in the USA.




 Microsoft, MS, MS-DOS, XENIX, and the Microsoft logo are registered
 trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. Windows is a trademark of Microsoft
 Corporation.

 IBM is a registered trademark of International Business
 Machines Corporation.

 Document Number: SY10060-0590
  OEM-D787-2Z






 Table of Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Before You Begin
      How To Use This Manual
      Notational Conventions
      Finding Further Information


 PART I  Overview
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Chapter 1  Using LAN Manager with MS-DOS

      How LAN Manager Works
      Different Versions of LAN Manager for MS-DOS
             The Enhanced Version
             The Basic Version
      Working with Other Network Products


 PART II  LAN Manager Enhanced
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Chapter 2  Getting Started

      Features of LAN Manager
             The LAN Manager Screen
             Command-Line Commands
             Online Help
             Profiles
             Services
      Starting LAN Manager Enhanced
             Starting the Workstation Service and Logging On
      The LAN Manager Screen
             Using Menus and Menu Commands
             Using Dialog Boxes
      Getting Online Help
             Getting Help with the LAN Manager Screen
             Getting Help from the Command Line
             Getting Help with Error Messages
      Viewing Network Resources
             Setting the Current Focus
             Viewing Shared Resources
             Viewing Users on the Network
      Understanding LAN Manager Accounts
             Viewing Information About User Accounts
             Changing Your Password
      Exiting the LAN Manager Screen
      Quitting LAN Manager Enhanced
             Logging Off from the Network
             Stopping the Workstation Service
      Starting LAN Manager Enhanced Automatically
             The LANMAN.INI File

 Chapter 3  Using Shared Directories

      Viewing Shared Directories
      Connecting to a Shared Directory
             Connecting to a Shared Directory Without Setting the Focus
             Making a Onetime Connection to a Shared Directory
      Viewing Your Connections
      Copying Files over the Network
      Moving Files over the Network
      Disconnecting from a Shared Directory
      Using Home Directories

 Chapter 4  Using Shared Printers

      Printer Queues
      Viewing Printer Queues and Print Jobs
      Connecting to a Printer Queue
             Connecting to Printer Queues Without Setting the Focus
             Making a Onetime Connection to a Printer Queue
      Viewing Your Connections
      Printing over the Network
      Holding, Releasing, and Deleting a Print Job
      Disconnecting from a Shared Printer Queue

 Chapter 5  Sending and Receiving Messages

      Sending Messages
      Reading Messages
             Using the Netpopup Service
             Reading Your Message Log
             Specifying a Different Message Log
             Stopping and Starting Message Logging
             Printing Messages
      Using Aliases
             Adding an Alias
             Deleting an Alias

 Chapter 6  Customizing Your Workstation

      Using Profiles
             Creating a Profile
             Loading a Profile
      Controlling Services
             Pausing a Service
             Continuing a Service
             Pausing and Continuing Connections to Resources
             Stopping the Workstation Service
             Adjusting Services
      Viewing the Workstation Configuration

 Chapter 7  Enhanced Command Reference

      Abbreviating Commands
      Using /yes and /no Options
             Using Passwords with Commands
      Controlling a Screen Display
      Using Commands in Batch Files
      Command Summary
             Net
             Net Access
             Net Config Workstation
             Net Continue
             Net Copy
             Net Help
             Net Helpmsg
             Net Load
             Net Log
             Net Logoff
             Net Logon
             Net Move
             Net Name
             Net Password
             Net Pause
             Net Print
             Net Save
             Net Send
             Net Start Messenger
             Net Start Netpopup
             Net Start Workstation
             Net Stop
             Net Time
             Net Use
             Net View
             Net Who


 PART III  LAN Manager Basic
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Chapter 8  Using LAN Manager Basic

      Starting LAN Manager Basic
      Getting Help
      Using Shared Directories
             Connecting to a Shared Directory
             Using MS-DOS Commands with Shared Directories
             Disconnecting from a Shared Directory
      Using Shared Printers
             Connecting to a Shared Printer Queue
             Printing over the Network
             Viewing the Status of a Print Job
             Disconnecting from a Shared Printer Queue
      Listing Connections to Network Resources
      Pausing and Continuing Connections

 Chapter 9  Basic Command Reference

      Command Summary
             Net Continue
             Net Help
             Net Name
             Net Pause
             Net Print
             Net Start Workstation
             Net Use

 Appendix A  Menu Commands

      The LAN Manager Screen
      View Menu
      Message Menu
      Config Menu
      Accounts Menu
      Help Menu

 Appendix A  Country Codes


 Glossary


 Index




 Before You Begin
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The Microsoft(R) LAN Manager User's Guide for MS-DOS(R) is for new and
 experienced users of Microsoft LAN Manager for the MS-DOS operating system.
 It describes how to use LAN Manager commands for the Enhanced and Basic
 versions and the LAN Manager Screen for the Enhanced version.

 This manual assumes that you know how to use a personal computer and that
 you are familiar with MS-DOS. If you are not familiar with MS-DOS, see your
 MS-DOS manual(s).

 Before using this manual, you should read Getting To Know Microsoft LAN
 Manager to learn terms and concepts specific to a local-area network and to
 LAN Manager.


 How To Use This Manual

 This manual is divided into three parts:

 Part 1, "Overview"
   Part 1 explains how a local-area network works and the differences between
   the two versions of LAN Manager for MS-DOSÄEnhanced and Basic. You should
   read this part if you are not familiar with LAN Manager.

 Part 2, "LAN Manager Enhanced"
   Part 2 describes how to use LAN Manager Enhanced to perform network tasks
   from the LAN Manager Screen and from the command line. It explains how to
   use shared directories and shared printers, send messages to other network
   users, and customize your workstation. It also provides reference
   information for each LAN Manager Enhanced command typed at the MS-DOS
   prompt. You should read this part to learn how to use LAN Manager
   Enhanced.

 Part 3, "LAN Manager Basic"
   Part 3 describes how to use LAN Manager Basic to perform network tasks
   from the command line. It explains how to use shared directories and
   shared printers and provides reference information for each LAN Manager
   Basic command. You should read this part to learn how to use LAN Manager
   Basic.


 Notational Conventions

 This manual uses different type styles and special characters for different
 purposes:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Bold                              Represents commands, command options,
                                   and file entries. Type the words exactly
                                   as they appear, for example,
                                   net use.

 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Italic                            Introduces new terms and represents
                                   variables. For example, the variable
                                   computername indicates that you supply
                                   the name of a workstation or server.

 Monospace                         Represents examples, screen displays,
                                   program code, and error messages.

 FULL CAPS                         Represent filenames and pathnames in
                                   text. You can, however, type entries in
                                   uppercase or lowercase letters.

 SMALL CAPS                        Represent key names (such as CTRL or F2).

 KEY+KEY                           Indicates that you must press two keys
                                   at the same time. For example, "Press
                                   CTRL+Z" means to hold down CTRL and
                                   press Z.
 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  press Z.

 {braces}                          Enclose required items in syntax
                                   statements. For example, {yes | no}
                                   indicates that you must specify yes or
                                   no when using the command. Type only the
                                   information within the braces, not the
                                   braces themselves.

 [brackets]                        Enclose optional items in syntax
                                   statements. For example, [password]
                                   indicates a password may be needed with
                                   the command. Type only the information
                                   within the brackets, not the brackets
                                   themselves.

 | (vertical bar)                  Separates items within braces or
                                   brackets. For example, {/hold | /release
                                   | /delete} indicates that only one of
 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  | /delete} indicates that only one of
                                   the three options can be used.

 ... (ellipsis)                    In syntax statements, indicates that you
                                   can repeat the previous item(s). For
                                   example, /route:devicename[,...]
                                   indicates that you can specify more than
                                   one device, putting a comma between the
                                   devicenames.

 <Command>                         Indicates a command button to be chosen
                                   within a dialog box.



 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 (continued)

             Indicates the procedure for performing a task using the LAN
              Manager Screen.

 Command     Indicates the procedure for performing a task using LAN
  Line        Manager commands at the MS-DOS prompt.



 Finding Further Information

 This manual is written for LAN Manager for MS-DOS users. In addition to this
 manual, the LAN Manager manual set includes the following:

 Getting To Know Microsoft LAN Manager
   Gives first-time network users an introduction to local-area networks and
   to LAN Manager.

 Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide for MS OS/2
   Provides guide and reference information about using LAN Manager on
   Microsoft Operating System/2 (MS(R) OS/2) workstations.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Installation Guide
   Provides information about installing LAN Manager software and using the
   Setup program to configure workstations and servers.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide
   Provides detailed information about administering a LAN Manager network.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference
   Provides reference information about LAN Manager commands and utilities
   for MS OS/2 computers, and about the LAN Manager program directory and
   initialization file.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide
   Provides information about network device drivers that can be used with
   LAN Manager.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Programmer's Reference
   Provides information about LAN Manager application program interfaces
   (APIs). (This manual is optionally available.)

 Quick references are also available for users and administrators.






 PART I  Overview
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Part 1 introduces LAN Manager for MS-DOS. It describes how a local-area
 network works and explains the differences between the two versions of LAN
 Manager for MS-DOSÄEnhanced and Basic.






 Chapter 1  Using LAN Manager with MS-DOS
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter describes LAN Manager for MS-DOS and explains the differences
 between LAN Manager Enhanced and LAN Manager Basic. Read this chapter to
 gain a general understanding of LAN Manager for MS-DOS. To learn specifics
 about each version of LAN Manager for MS-DOS, see Part 2, "LAN Manager
 Enhanced," or Part 3, "LAN Manager Basic."


 How LAN Manager Works

 LAN Manager expands the features of MS-DOS to let your computer join a
 local-area network. A local-area network is a group of personal computers
 that can communicate with each other and share resources.

 A LAN Manager network is comprised of workstations and servers. Workstations
 are computers that can use information and equipment on the network. Your
 workstation runs MS-DOS; others on the network can run MS-DOS or MS OS/2.
 Servers are computers that control information and equipment that
 workstations use. A server can also be used as a workstation. A server runs
 MS OS/2.

 Information and equipment are made available to you and other network users
 through a process called sharing. The servers on a network share
 resourcesÄdirectories and printersÄwith network users at workstations.

 You can use a shared resource by connecting your workstation to the server
 sharing the resource. The resource is then used as though it were attached
 to your computer, even if it is actually located down the hall or in another
 part of the building.

 The person who maintains the network is called an administrator. A network
 can have one or more administrators. Administrators share resources at
 servers and handle network security. If you need a password to connect to a
 shared resource or if you have trouble using your workstation, ask your
 administrator for help.


 Different Versions of LAN Manager for MS-DOS

 Two versions of LAN Manager for MS-DOSÄEnhanced and BasicÄare available for
 a workstation. If you are not sure which version your computer is running,
 ask your administrator.


 The Enhanced Version

 LAN Manager Enhanced features the LAN Manager Screen, a full-screen
 interface that lets you use shared resources and perform other network
 tasks. With LAN Manager Enhanced, you can


   ş   Use LAN Manager Screen menus and dialog boxes, or type LAN Manager
       Enhanced commands from the MS-DOS command line, to perform network
       tasks

   ş   Get online help with the LAN Manager Screen and command-line commands

   ş   Display the contents of printer queues and control print jobs in a
       queue

   ş   Move and copy files between any two directories on the network

   ş   Send messages to and receive messages from other users

   ş   Create a customized set of network connectionsÄ called a profileÄwhich
       lets you connect to several resources with one command


 To learn how to use LAN Manager Enhanced, see Part 2, "LAN Manager
 Enhanced."


 The Basic Version

 LAN Manager Basic is used by typing commands at the MS-DOS prompt. With LAN
 Manager Basic, you can


   ş   Add your computer to a network

   ş   Use shared disk drives, directories, files, and printers

   ş   Get online help

   ş   Display the contents of printer queues

   ş   Pause and continue connections to network resources


 To learn how to use LAN Manager Basic, see Part 3, "LAN Manager Basic."


 Working with Other Network Products

 LAN Manager software works with products outside the LAN Manager family. For
 example, computers running MS-Net or XENIX(R) network software can share
 resources with LAN Manager workstations. Figure 1.1 shows a network with
 mixed products.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).






 PART II  LAN Manager Enhanced
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Part 2 explains how to use a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation to perform
 network tasks. It describes how to start and stop the workstation, log on to
 and log off from the local-area network, get help, and use the LAN Manager
 Screen. It also describes procedures for using shared resources, sending and
 receiving messages, and customizing your workstation. Additionally, LAN
 Manager Enhanced commands typed at the MS-DOS prompt are explained in
 detail.






 Chapter 2  Getting Started
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter introduces LAN Manager Enhanced, and explains how to start your
 workstation and log on to the network.

 The LAN Manager Screen is described, with instructions for moving around the
 screen using the keyboard and the mouse. Information is provided about
 getting help with commands and error messages, viewing network resources,
 and understanding user accounts. This chapter ends with an explanation of
 how to exit the LAN Manager Screen and quit LAN Manager Enhanced.

 If LAN Manager Enhanced hasn't been installed on your computer, contact your
 administrator.

 The procedures in this chapter are described using the LAN Manager Screen,
 followed by the equivalent command you type at the MS-DOS prompt. Each LAN
 Manager Enhanced command is discussed in detail in Chapter 7, "Enhanced
 Command Reference."


 Features of LAN Manager

 This section introduces some of the features of LAN Manager Enhanced,
 including the LAN Manager Screen, commands, online help, profiles, and
 services.


 The LAN Manager Screen

 The LAN Manager Screen is a menu-oriented, full-screen interface that allows
 you to use LAN Manager without memorizing command syntax. Most network tasks
 can be performed with the LAN Manager Screen. The LAN Manager Screen is
 displayed in Figure 2.1.


 Command-Line Commands

 In addition to using the LAN Manager Screen to perform network tasks, you
 can also type LAN Manager commands at the MS-DOS prompt. (This can be done
 by exiting the LAN Manager Screen.)

 Chapters 3-6 describe procedures for performing network tasks with the LAN
 Manager Screen, followed by the equivalent command-line command. For tasks
 that cannot be performed using the LAN Manager Screen, the command-line
 command is discussed in more detail. For detailed information about all
 typed LAN Manager Enhanced commands, see Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command
 Reference."


 Online Help

 Help is available both from the LAN Manager Screen and from the MS-DOS
 command line. The LAN Manager Screen provides context-sensitive help on most
 topics. From any dialog box, you can get help with the dialog box as well as
 many associated functions and terms.


 Profiles

 LAN Manager allows you to make connections to shared resources, then save a
 record of these connections in a file called a profile. You can use this
 profile to automatically reestablish the connections.

 Connections specified in a profile can replace existing connections or be
 added to them. For information about creating and using profiles, see
 Chapter 6, "Customizing Your Workstation."


 Services

 A service is a program that performs one of the major functions of LAN
 Manager. Major services are the following:

 Workstation
   The Workstation service is the primary service for a workstation. If the
   Workstation service isn't running, no other service can run. Once you
   start the Workstation service and log on, you can use the network and gain
   access to shared resources.

 Messenger
   The Messenger service lets you receive messages from other network users
   or from LAN Manager Enhanced (for example, when your print job has been
   printed). You can use message logging to save these messages in a file.
   For more information about the Messenger service, see Chapter 5, "Sending
   and Receiving Messages."

 Netpopup
   The Netpopup service displays messages on your screen as they arrive from
   other users or from LAN Manager Enhanced. For more information about the
   Netpopup service, see Chapter 5, "Sending and Receiving Messages."


 Starting LAN Manager Enhanced

 Starting LAN Manager Enhanced involves two separate tasks:


   ş   Starting the Workstation service

   ş   Logging on to the network


 When you start the Workstation service, software that lets you use shared
 resources and send and receive messages is loaded into your computer's
 memory.

 Logging on identifies you on the network and establishes you as the user of
 the workstation. When you log on, you supply your username and password,
 which identify you as a member of a domain. A domain is a group of computers
 and users on the network.

 Domains keep the network organized and simplify administration. They have
 names, just like workstations and servers. When you log on, you
 automatically log on in the workstation domain. You don't need to specify
 the workstation domain name; it is specified in the LAN Manager Enhanced
 software. You can override the workstation domain by supplying the name of a
 different domain in which to log on. This domain is called the logon domain.


 A server called the primary domain controller or a logon server verifies
 that you are allowed to log on in a domain. On this server, the
 administrator maintains a record of user accounts, which define the hours
 that each user can log on and the access that he or she has to resources in
 the domain.


 Starting the Workstation Service and Logging On

 You must start the Workstation service before you can log on to the network
 or use the LAN Manager Screen.

 To start the Workstation service, at the MS-DOS prompt, type

 net start workstation

 Once the Workstation service is started, you must log on. The procedure for
 logging on using the LAN Manager Screen is given first, followed by the
 equivalent command typed from the command line.

   To log on:


   1.  Start the LAN Manager Screen from the command line by typing

       net
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Typing net /mono improves the LAN Manager Screen display for some computer
 screens. Try the command with and without /mono to determine which display
 you


       The following message box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       Your username should appear in the "Username" text box. If it is not
       displayed, see your administrator. You can specify a different
       username by typing over the username that is displayed.

   2.  To move the cursor to the "Password" text box, press TAB, then type
       your password.

       The password is not displayed as you type it.

   3.  To move the cursor to the "Domain" text box, press TAB. Leave this
       text box blank to log on in the workstation domain.

   4.  Type a domain name to specify a logon domain.

   5.  To move to the <OK> command button, press TAB. Press ENTER.

       Message boxes are displayed telling you that the logon was successful
       and what privilege level you have at your workstation. The privilege
       level defines the range of action you have at your workstation or on a
       server. To remove message boxes from the LAN Manager Screen, press
       ESC.


 Along with the Workstation service, LAN Manager Enhanced, by default, starts
 these other services:


   ş   The Messenger service, which lets you send, receive, and log messages
       to a file.

   ş   The Netpopup service, which displays messages on your computer's
       screen when they are received from another user or a server on the
       network. These messages are not part of the LAN Manager Screen; they
       appear regardless of which application you are using. The Netpopup
       service requires that the Messenger service be running.


 These services are described in more detail in Chapter 5, "Sending and
 Receiving Messages."

 Command Line    To start the Workstation service and log on:


   1.  Start the Workstation service by typing

       net start workstation

   2.  Log on to the network by typing

       net logon [username [password | *]] [/domain:name]

       See Net Start Workstation and Net Logon, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command
       Reference."



 The LAN Manager Screen

 The LAN Manager Screen lets you browse around the network, locate shared
 resources, and connect to those resources without having to memorize
 commands or syntax.

 Figure 2.1 shows the LAN Manager Screen, noting the elements of the screen.


 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The fields of the LAN Manager Screen provide the following information:

 Menu bar
   Displays the names of menus from which you can choose commands.

 Current focus
   Shows the computername of your workstation or the server that is the focus
   of activity when using LAN Manager Screen commands.

 Workstation information
   Provides the following information about your workstation:

     Your username
       The username specified when you logged on to the network.

     Your computername
       The computername specified when the workstation was started.

     Your domain
       The name of your logon domain. This is the domain name specified when
       you logged on to the network. If you didn't specify a domain name, you
       automatically logged on in the workstation domain. Note that the
       workstation domain and the logon domain are the same if you are logged
       on in the workstation domain.

 Servers in the logon and workstation domains
   Lists the servers in your logon and workstation domains.

 Scroll bar
   Lets you scroll through the servers in the list box with the mouse.

 Message line
   Provides a brief statement about the menu, command, or current task.

 To use the LAN Manager Screen, you select a menu, which displays a list of
 commands. When you choose a command, a dialog box appears, in which you type
 information to perform a task.

 The following sections explain menus and dialog boxes and tell you how to
 use the keyboard and the mouse to move through them and perform tasks.


 Using Menus and Menu Commands

 Menus are the starting point for any LAN Manager Screen operation. The names
 of all five menus appear in the menu bar across the top of the LAN Manager
 Screen. When you select a menu, a list of commands appears. Except for Exit
 on the View menu, each command leads to a dialog box. If a menu command does
 not contain a highlighted letter, the command is not available.

 From menus on the LAN Manager Screen, you can perform the following tasks:

 View menu
   View and connect to resources shared on servers, view your workstation's
   connections, and view information about users on the network. You can also
   exit the LAN Manager Screen.

 Message menu
   Send, log, and read messages, and specify an alias (a name used to receive
   messages).

 Config menu
   Log on, log off, use profiles, and view your workstation configuration.

 Accounts menu
   Change the options for your account and change your password at a server.

 Help menu
   Get different types of help with LAN Manager Enhanced.

 When viewing or selecting menus and menu commands, use these keys:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Key                 Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Key                 Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 ALT                 Activates menu names on the menu bar.

 Highlighted letter  Once menu names are activated with ALT or menu
                     commands are displayed, selects the menu or chooses
                     the menu command containing the highlighted letter.

                   Once a menu is displayed, moves from one menu to
                     another.

                    Once a menu is displayed, moves from one command to
                    another.

 ENTER               Selects the highlighted menu or menu command.

 ESC                 Removes a menu from the screen.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 To select a menu with the mouse, click the menu name (use the mouse to
 position the pointer on the menu name and press the left mouse button). The
 menu appears, and you can choose a menu command by clicking it.


 Using Dialog Boxes

 Dialog boxes supply information to perform a task. They contain as many as
 five types of areas, or fields. Each dialog box has a title, which is
 displayed at the top.


 Dialog Box Fields

 Dialog boxes contain one or more of the following types of fields:


   ş   Text boxes, which receive typed information

   ş   List boxes, which present a list of items to select from

   ş   Check boxes, which let you mark or unmark an option

   ş   Option buttons, which let you select one of several options

   ş   Command buttons, which perform an action


 Figure 2.2 shows a dialog box with four types of fields.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 Use the following keys to move around in dialog boxes:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Highlighted letter                Moves the cursor to the field containing
                                   the highlighted letter. If the cursor is
                                   in a list box or a text box, hold down
                                   ALT while pressing the highlighted
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  ALT while pressing the highlighted
                                   letter. If moving to a command button,
                                   pressing the highlighted letter
                                   activates the command button.

 TAB                               Moves the cursor to the next field.

 SHIFT+TAB                         Moves the cursor to the previous field.

 ENTER                             Carries out the actions you specified.

 ESC                               Cancels any actions and closes the
                                   dialog box.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 The following sections describe each type of dialog box field.

 Text Boxes - In a text box, you type information. A text box is surrounded
 by brackets and contains a series of dots that are replaced with characters
 as you type. It sometimes holds more characters than appear between the
 brackets. You can view these characters by using the RIGHT direction key to
 scroll to the left. Sometimes a text box may appear with information
 provided, such as your username.

 When in a text box, use the following keys:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Key         Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
            Moves the cursor one space to the left.
            Moves the cursor one space to the right.
 HOME        Moves the cursor to the first character in the text box.
 END         Moves the cursor to the last character in the text box.
 DEL         Deletes the character that the cursor is on.
 BACKSPACE   Deletes the character to the left of the cursor.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 If you are using the mouse, you can scroll the characters in the text box by
 clicking the left or right bracket.

 List Boxes - A list box lets you view items by scrolling through a list, or
 select an item from the list. For example, you can view lists of resources
 available on a server or lists of print jobs waiting to be printed.

 Use the following keys to move around in a list box:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  Moves the cursor up one line.

                                  Moves the cursor down one line.

 PG UP                             Moves the cursor up one page. (A page is
                                   the portion of the list that appears on
                                   the screen.)

 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 PG DN                             Moves the cursor down one page.

 HOME                              Moves the cursor to the top of the list.

 END                               Moves the cursor to the bottom of the
                                   list.

 F5                                Updates a list.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Pressing a letter while the cursor is in a list box (including the list box
 of server names on the LAN Manager Screen) moves the cursor to the next item
 that begins with that letter.

 A scroll bar and a scroll box are displayed at the right of the list box.
 The scroll bar lets you use the mouse to move through a list with more than
 one screen of information. Click the up or down arrow to move the view up or
 down one line.

 The position of the scroll box reflects the position of the information in
 the window relative to the total contents of the list. You can move through
 the list with the mouse by dragging the scroll box (positioning the pointer
 on the scroll box, holding the left mouse button down, then moving the mouse
 up or down).

 To select an item in a list box with the mouse, click the item. If the
 dialog box has a <Zoom> command button, double-clicking an item (positioning
 the pointer on the item and quickly pressing and releasing the mouse button
 twice) zooms in on it. Otherwise, double-clicking performs the action
 corresponding to the first command button listed.

 If a dialog box has a pair of list boxes, double-clicking an item in one
 list box often moves it to the other list box.

 Check Boxes - With a check box, you turn an option on or off. When a check
 box is marked with an X, the option is on. Use the SPACEBAR as a toggle
 switch to mark or unmark a check box.

 To mark or unmark a check box with the mouse, click it.

 Option Buttons - With an option button, you select one option from a group
 of options. One option button is always selected, and only one option button
 can be selected at a time.

 To select an option button, use the following keys:

 Key         Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
            Changes the selection to the previous option.
            Changes the selection to the next option.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To select an option button with the mouse, click it.

 Command Buttons - A command button performs a specific action. If a command
 button does not contain a highlighted letter, the command button is
 unavailable.

 To choose a command button, press TAB to move to the button and press ENTER.
 You can also press the highlighted letter in the command button (if the
 cursor is in a list box or text field, you must hold down ALT while pressing
 the highlighted letter).

 To choose a command button with the mouse, click it.


 Getting Online Help

 Online help is available for the LAN Manager Screen and for LAN Manager
 Enhanced commands typed at the MS-DOS prompt.


 Getting Help with the LAN Manager Screen

 There are two ways to get help while using the LAN Manager Screen: by
 selecting the Help menu or by pressing F1. The Help menu provides access to
 help topics.

 To get information about a menu, command, or dialog box, press F1 while that
 item is displayed.If you press F1 with no dialog box or menu displayed, the
 following appears:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To remove a help box from the screen, choose <Done> or press ESC.


 Getting Help from the Command Line

 Several types of help are available from the command line.

 Command Line    To get a list of commands and topics for which help is
 available, type

 net help

 To display detailed information about a command, type

     net help command

 To display a command's options, type

 net help command /options

 To display a command's syntax, type

 net command /?

 See Net Help, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Getting Help with Error Messages

 To get help with an error that occurs while you are using the LAN Manager
 Screen, press F1 while the message box is displayed.

 Command Line    To get help with an error message, type

 net helpmsg message#

 See Net Helpmsg, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Viewing Network Resources

 With the View menu, you can view servers and shared resources on the
 network, and view users on a server or in a domain.

 After you log on, a list of visible servers in your workstation domain (and
 your logon domain, if a domain other than the workstation domain was
 specified at logon) is displayed on the LAN Manager Screen. You may not have
 access to all servers listed, and all servers you have access to may not be
 visible. Your administrator determines whether a server is visible on the
 network. Check with your administrator to find out which servers are
 available to you.


 Setting the Current Focus

 When you start the LAN Manager Screen, the "Current focus" line and the "Set
 current focus on" text box display your workstation's computername. This
 means the workstation is the focus of activity when you use menus and dialog
 boxes.

 Using the LAN Manager Screen, you can connect to shared resources and
 perform other tasks at servers. The first step in performing a task is to
 set the current focus on the server that is showing the resources you want
 to view or use. This makes the server the focus of activity.

   To set the current focus on a server:


   1.  Select the computername of a server by scrolling through the list box
       or pressing the first letter of the server's computername until the
       name appears in the "Set current focus on" text box. Or you can type
       the server's computername in the "Set current focus on" text box.

   2.  Press ENTER, or double-click the server name.

       The server's computername is then displayed on the "Current focus"
       line, and a message box is displayed that shows your privileges on
       that server.



 Viewing Shared Resources

 After setting the current focus on a server, you can view that server's
 shared resources. Shared resources are directories and printers.

   To view shared resources on a server:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server that you want to view.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Available resources.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The dialog box shows the different types of resources available on
       that server. Available resources include shared directories (Disk) and
       printers (Printer).

   3.  Choose <Done>.


  For more information about connecting to and using shared resources, see
  Chapter 3, "Using Shared Directories," and Chapter 4, "Using Shared
  Printers."

 Command Line    To view shared resources on a server, type

 net view \\computername

 See Net View, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Network Paths

 Every shared resource on the network is identified by a network path. This
 is the computername of the server sharing the resource followed by the
 resource's sharenameÄthe name an administrator assigns to it. The
 computername is preceded by two backslashes (\\), and the sharename is
 preceded by one backslash (\).

 For example, \\SALES\REPORTS specifies the network path for the REPORTS
 shared directory on the \\SALES server.

 Network paths are used in dialog boxes and in commands typed at the MS-DOS
 prompt.


 Viewing Users on the Network

 You can view a list of users whose workstations are connected to a
 particular server or who are logged on in a particular domain.

   To view information about users connected to a server:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server that you want to view.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Users on a server.


     The dialog box shown in Figure 2.3 appears.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

     For each user with a connection to the server, this dialog box lists the
     username, the computername of the workstation where the user is logged
     on, the length of time since the connection was established, and the
     user's full name.


   1.  To view more information about a user, in the list box, select the
       username and choose <Zoom>.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 2.4 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Choose <Done>.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view information about users connected to a server, type

 net who \\computername

 See Net Who, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."

   To view users logged on in a domain:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Users on a domain.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Known domains" list box, select a domain and choose <OK>.

       A dialog box appears that lists the users logged on in that domain.
       The fields contain the same types of information as those shown in the
       "Current Users on Server \\computername" dialog box (Figure 2.3).

   3.  To view information about a user, in the list box, select the username
       and choose <Zoom>.

       More information about the user appears in the "Information on user
       username" dialog box (Figure 2.4).

   4.  Choose <Done>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view users logged on in a domain, type

 net who /domain:name

 See Net Who, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Understanding LAN Manager Accounts

 LAN Manager uses user accounts to control access to domains and shared
 resources. These accounts contain information about users. In a domain,
 accounts specify which users can log on. On a server, accounts specify which
 users can use shared resources.

 In a domain, your account includes the username and password that you must
 supply to log on, your full name, a comment about you, and a record of the
 hours during which you can log on. When you log on in a domain, the domain
 controller or a logon server verifies that the username and password you
 supply match those in an existing user account.

 An account on a server includes your username and the password you must
 supply to gain access to the server's resources. If the password you
 supplied when you logged on matches the password in a server's account, you
 can use the server's resources. Otherwise, you must supply a password when
 connecting to a resource to gain access. Note that having an account on a
 server does not guarantee access to all of its resources. Your administrator
 can set up permissions for each user to control access to each of the
 server's resources.


 Viewing Information About User Accounts

 You can view information about your account, such as your username, account
 privileges, date of last logon, and logon times.

   To view information about your user account:


   1.  To view information about your account in the logon domain, set the
       current focus on your workstation, or to view information about your
       account at a server, set the current focus on that server.

   2.  From the Accounts menu, choose Your account.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       If the current focus is set on your workstation, the computername
       displayed in the dialog box title is that of the primary domain
       controller.

       Except for the "User comment" and "Country code" fields, the
       information in this dialog box cannot be changed.

       The "User comment" text box lets you enter a comment about yourself
       that others can read, such as your office location or phone extension.
       This comment is displayed after your name in the "Information on user
       username" dialog box (Figure 2.4) under the Users on a server or Users
       on a domain command in the View menu. It is also displayed when you
       type net who username from the command line. The "User comment" field
       can have as many as 48 characters.

       The "Country code" number specifies the language in which servers send
       messages to you. For more information about country codes, see
       Appendix B, "Country Codes."

   3.  Choose <Logon times>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box displays the times during which you can use the
       server's resources. Your administrator determines these times. You
       cannot edit any of the fields.

   4.  Choose <Done>.

   5.  Choose <OK>.



 Changing Your Password

 You may need to change your password for an account if, for example, it is
 nearing expiration. LAN Manager alerts you when your password is expired.

 See your administrator if you forget a password.

   To change your password:


   1.  To change your password in your logon domain account, set the current
       focus on your workstation, or to change your password on a server, set
       the current focus on that server.

   2.  From the Accounts menu, choose Change your password.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  In the "Old password" text box, type your current password.

   4.  In the "New password" text box, type your new password.

   5.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To change your password, type

 net password [[\\computername | /domain:name] username oldpassword
 newpassword]

 See Net Password, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Exiting the LAN Manager Screen

 Exiting the LAN Manager Screen returns you to the MS-DOS prompt but does not
 log you off from the network or stop LAN Manager Enhanced services. You can
 still use the connections you made from the LAN Manager Screen.

   To exit the LAN Manager Screen:


   1.  Press ESC to close each open dialog box.

   2.  Press F3, or from the View menu, choose Exit.


 The LAN Manager Screen disappears, and the MS-DOS prompt appears on your
 computer's screen.

 To restart the LAN Manager Screen, type net at the MS-DOS prompt.


 Quitting LAN Manager Enhanced

 Quitting LAN Manager Enhanced involves two steps:


   ş   Logging off from the network

   ş   Stopping the Workstation service



 Logging Off from the Network

 Logging off removes your username and password from the workstation and
 cancels any existing connections to shared resources, but it does not stop
 LAN Manager Enhanced services. Log off when you won't be using the
 workstation for a while. That way, no one can use your network identity to
 use resources to which you have access.

   To log off from the network:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Log off from LAN.

       If you have any connections, the following message box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  To continue logging off, choose <OK>.

       The following message box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Once logged off, you can't use any shared resources. However, the
 Workstation service is still running.

 Command Line    To log off from the network, type

 net logoff

 See Net Logoff, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Stopping the Workstation Service

 When you stop the Workstation service, all network services are stopped and
 connections to the network are ended. You must restart the Workstation
 service and log on if you want to use the network again.

 Alternatively, the workstation can be paused, which is similar to stopping
 the workstation but doesn't cancel connections. Pausing puts the workstation
 on hold but keeps your username and password active. It also pauses any
 other services, such as Messenger or Netpopup, that are running. See Chapter
 6, "Customizing Your Workstation," for more information about pausing
 services.

 Stopping the Workstation service stops all other services and removes
 software from your computer's memory. LAN Manager Enhanced is a "Terminate
 and Stay Resident" program, which means that when it stops, some of the
 software stays in your computer's memory. If other TSR programs are loaded
 into your computer's memory, the net stop command may not work.

 Command Line    To stop the Workstation service, type

 net stop workstation

 See Net Stop, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Starting LAN Manager Enhanced Automatically

 LAN Manager Enhanced commands that can be typed at the MS-DOS prompt can be
 put in batch files so that they run automatically.

 For example, to start the Workstation service when you start your computer,
 put the following command in the AUTOEXEC.BAT file:

 net start workstation

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 To maintain network security, do not put your passwords in a batch program.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To learn more about batch programs, see your MS-DOS manual(s).

 For more information about LAN Manager Enhanced commands, see Chapter 7,
 "Enhanced Command Reference."


 The LANMAN.INI File

 As you work with LAN Manager Enhanced, you'll see that many aspects of your
 workstation's performance are predefined. For example, when you start the
 LAN Manager Screen, your username probably appears in the "Log Onto Network"
 dialog box. Likewise, your workstation is set up to include a computername,
 workstation domain, and so on.

 These features or settings are defined in a file called LANMAN.INI, which
 resides in the LANMAN.DOS directory. LANMAN.INI is an initialization file
 that contains an entry with a default value for each setting (such as the
 computername). You can change settings temporarily by using the net start
 command. To change them permanently, edit the LANMAN.INI file.

 You normally won't need to adjust LANMAN.INI entries. For information about
 adjusting entries, see your administrator.

 The LANMAN.INI file is discussed in Chapter 6, "Customizing Your
 Workstation." Settings and values are defined in the Microsoft LAN Manager
 Administrator's Reference.






 Chapter 3  Using Shared Directories
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 A shared directory is a disk directory on a server to which users of the
 network have access. A shared directory contains files that are available to
 network users. Using a shared directory, one person can write a report,
 another person can review it, and a third person can format and print it,
 all without passing a floppy disk around the office.

 This chapter explains how to use shared directories. It includes procedures
 for viewing, connecting to, and disconnecting from a shared directory, and
 seeing which shared directories your workstation is connected to. In
 addition, the command-line syntax for moving and copying files over the
 network is provided.


 Viewing Shared Directories

 To see which shared resources are available to you, the Workstation service
 must be running and you must be logged on to the network. For information
 about starting the Workstation service and logging on, see Chapter 2,
 "Getting Started."

 The LAN Manager Screen displays a list of visible servers. This includes
 servers in the workstation domain, logon domain, and other domains (if any)
 specified in the LANMAN.INI file.

   To view shared directories:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server whose shared directories you want
       to view.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Available resources.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 3.1 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       Shared directories are listed as "Disk" in the "Type" column.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view shared directories, type

 net view \\computername

 See Net View, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Connecting to a Shared Directory

 Connecting to a shared directory allows you to use the directory as if it
 were another disk drive on your workstation. When you connect to a shared
 directory, you can use files or programs in that directory. You can also
 copy a file or a program to the directory for use by others. You usually
 assign a devicename to the directory. A devicename is a name by which your
 computer identifies a device. A disk drive devicename is a letter followed
 by a colon.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If you assign a devicename of a disk drive on your computer (for example,
 A:), your workstation recognizes the network connectionÄnot the local
 driveÄunless the network connection is paused or disconnected. Avoid
 assigning the C: devicename.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

   To connect your workstation to a shared directory:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server with the shared directory you want
       to use.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Available resources.

       The "Resources Available at \\computername" dialog box (Figure 3.1)
       appears. The list box displays available resources on the server.
       Directories are listed as "Disk" in the "Type" column.

   3.  In the list box, select the directory to which you want to connect.

   4.  Choose <Use resource>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       LAN Manager Enhanced provides the next available devicename in the
       "Local device" text box, but you can type a different one.

   5.  In the "Password" text box, type a password if needed.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

   7.  Choose <Done>.


 The workstation is now connected to the directory you selected. You can use
 it the same way you use your workstation's disk drives, as shown in Figure
 3.2.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).


 Connecting to a Shared Directory Without Setting the Focus

 The LAN Manager Screen allows you to connect your workstation to shared
 directories on servers other than the server of current focus. This includes
 servers that are not visible on the LAN Manager Screen and servers in other
 domains.

 LAN Manager Enhanced also lets you connect your workstation to servers on
 the network that are not running LAN Manager (for example, XENIX servers).
 Because these servers have different interfaces, their computernames do not
 appear on the LAN Manager Screen.

   To connect to a directory on a server other than the server of current
 focus:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 3.3 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Choose <Add use>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       LAN Manager Enhanced has preselected "Disk" in the "Type of Use" box.

       LAN Manager Enhanced provides the next available devicename in the
       "Local device" text box, but you can type a different one.

   3.  In the "Network resource" text box, type the network path of the
       shared directory.

   4.  In the "Password" text box, type a password if needed.

   5.  Choose <OK>.

   6.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To connect to a directory on a server other than the server
 of current focus, type

 net use devicename \\computername\sharename [password]

 See Net Use, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Making a Onetime Connection to a Shared Directory

 You can use a shared directory without assigning a devicename to the
 connection. Do this from the command line by using the network path as part
 of a pathname with some commands or application programs.

 For example, to use Microsoft Word to edit the LIST.DOC file in the shared
 directory with the network path \\SALES\FARWEST, start Word and load the
 file by typing

   word \\sales\farwest\list.doc

 The Word program loads the shared file even though you haven't made a
 previous connection to \\SALES\FARWEST. Note that this procedure will not
 work if a password is needed to gain access to \\SALES\FARWEST. If so, you
 must first establish access to the directory.


 Viewing Your Connections

 At any time, you can view directories connected to your workstation.

   To view directories connected to your workstation:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The "Resources in Use by username at \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 3.3) appears. Devicenames D: through Z: in the "Device" column
       identify connections to shared directories.

       (Please refer to the printed book)

   2.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view directories connected to your workstation, type

 net use

 See Net Use, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Copying Files over the Network

 Use the net copy command to copy a file over the network, to or from your
 workstation, or between servers. The MS-DOS copy command can be used in
 place of net copy, but net copy is faster when both the source and
 destination are on the same server. Files can be copied from the command
 line only.

 Command Line    To copy a file, type

 net copy source [destination]

 For example:

   net copy \\production\lists\sales.doc \\production\reports

 See Net Copy, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Moving Files over the Network

 Use the net move command to move a file over the network, to or from your
 workstation, or between servers. Files can be moved from the command line
 only.

 The net move command differs from the net copy command in that it deletes
 the file at its source location when it moves the file.

 Command Line    To move a file, type

 net move source [destination]

 If no destination is specified, the file moves to the current directory.

 See Net Move, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Disconnecting from a Shared Directory

 You can disconnect your workstation from a shared directory when you are
 finished using a resource or when you want to use the devicename for a
 different connection.

   To disconnect your workstation from a shared directory:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The "Resources in Use by username at \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 3.3) appears.

   2.  In the list box, select the shared directory that you want to
       disconnect your workstation from.

   3.  Choose <Stop using>.

   4.  When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To disconnect your workstation from a shared directory,
 type

 net use devicename /delete

 See Net Use, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Using Home Directories

 Your administrator may have set aside a directory on a server for your own
 personal use. This is your home directory.

 You can use this directory to create and copy files, create and remove
 subdirectories, and do anything else that you ordinarily do with a directory
 on your own computer. You can also set LAN Manager permissions for files and
 subdirectories, allowing other people to use the contents of your home
 directory. Your administrator can override the permissions you set since
 your home directory is part of the server's disk drive. Your administrator
 also sets a limit on how much disk space you can use for your home
 directory.

 For information about permissions, see Net Access in Chapter 7, "Enhanced
 Command Reference."






 Chapter 4  Using Shared Printers
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 With LAN Manager you can print files by sending them from your workstation
 to shared printers. This chapter explains shared printer queues and how to
 view, connect to, control, and disconnect from a printer queue. Procedures
 are provided for using a printer queue and for finding out which printer
 queues your workstation is using.


 Printer Queues

 A shared printer is one that is available to network users on a server.LAN
 Manager Enhanced uses printer queues to hold print jobs.Jobs sent to a
 printer queue are printed one by one, usually in the order that the queue
 receives them (see Figure 4.1).

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 Printer queues can be set up in different ways: one printer can handle jobs
 from several queues, or one queue can send jobs to several similar printers.


 If a single printer receives jobs from several queues, the queues can have
 different priorities for printing. The printer might receive requests from a
 low-priority queue that accepts jobs from all network users and also from a
 high-priority queue that accepts jobs only from users who need files printed
 quickly.

 If several printers receive jobs from a single queue, the server controlling
 the queue informs users which printer printed their jobs.

 If the Messenger and Netpopup services are running on your workstation, a
 message is displayed when the print job is printed. For information about
 the Messenger and Netpopup services, see Chapter 5, "Sending and Receiving
 Messages."


 Viewing Printer Queues and Print Jobs

 You may want to view a list of available printer queues to determine where
 to send a print job or to monitor jobs that you have sent to a particular
 queue.

   To view printer queues and their print jobs:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the printer queue that you
       want to view.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Printer queues.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 4.2 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       For each queue, the name, number of print jobs waiting, and status of
       the queue are displayed.

       Each print job is identified with a line containing the username, job
       number (assigned by the server), size of the job (in bytes), and
       status of the job.

       Scroll through the list if necessary.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view printer queues and their print jobs, type

 net print \\computername

 See Net Print, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Connecting to a Printer Queue

 Connecting to a printer queue allows you to use the queue as if it were a
 printer attached to your computer. You connect your workstation to a printer
 queue by assigning a devicename to the queue. Devicenames LPT1: through
 LPT3: are available for printer queues.

   To connect your workstation to a printer queue:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the printer queue that you
       want to use.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Available resources.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The list box displays available resources at that server. Printer
       queues are listed as "Printer" in the "Type" column.

   3.  Select the printer queue that you want to use.

   4.  Choose <Use resource>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       LAN Manager Enhanced provides the next available devicename in the
       "Local device" text box, but you can type a different one.

   5.  In the "Password" text box, type a password if needed.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

   7.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To connect your workstation to a printer queue, type

 net use devicename\\computername\sharename [password]

 See Net Use, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Connecting to Printer Queues Without Setting the Focus

 The LAN Manager Screen allows you to connect your workstation to printer
 queues on servers other than the server of current focus. This includes
 servers that are not visible on the LAN Manager Screen and servers in other
 domains.

 LAN Manager Enhanced also lets you connect your workstation to servers on
 the network that are not running LAN Manager. Because these servers have
 different interfaces, they do not appear on the LAN Manager Screen.

   To connect to a printer queue on a server other than the server of
 current focus:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 4.3 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Choose <Add use>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  In the "Type of Use" list box, select the "Printer" option button.

       LAN Manager Enhanced provides the next available devicename in the
       "Local device" text box, but you can type a different one.

   4.  In the "Network resource" text box, type the network path of the
       printer queue.

   5.  In the "Password" text box, type a password if needed.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

   7.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To connect to a shared printer queue, type

 net use devicename \\computername\sharename [password]

 See Net Use, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Making a Onetime Connection to a Printer Queue

 It is not necessary to assign a devicename to a printer queue if you only
 need to print one file.You can copy the file directly to a printer queue by
 specifying the network path as the destination of the net copy command.

 For example, if your current directory contains the PHONE.LST file and you
 want to send the file to the HOLES printer queue on the \\ADMIN server, type


   net copy phone.lst \\admin\holes

 LAN Manager Enhanced connects your workstation to the printer queue and
 copies the file to the queue for printing. After copying, the connection is
 canceled. Note that this procedure will not work if a password is needed to
 gain access to \\ADMIN\HOLES. If so, you must first make a connection to the
 queue by assigning it a devicename.


 Viewing Your Connections

   To view your workstation's connections to printer queues:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The "Resources in Use by username at \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 4.3) appears. If you have a connection to a printer queue, you
       will see an LPT devicename under the "Device" column.

   2.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view your workstation's connections to printer queues,
 type

 net use

 See Net Use, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Printing over the Network

 Once a connection is made, you can use a printer queue as if a printer were
 attached to your computer. You simply direct the print output to the
 devicename that you assigned to the queue. Many application programs send
 their output to LPT1: by default.

 In addition, you can send a file to be printed with MS-DOS commands by using
 the devicename assigned to the queue in the syntax for the command, for
 example:

   copy report.doc lpt2:

 or

   print /d:lpt2 report.doc

 For more information about using the MS-DOS copy and print commands, see
 your MS-DOS manual(s).


 Holding, Releasing, and Deleting a Print Job

 Holding a print job causes the server to suspend the job until you release
 it. Deleting a print job removes it from the queue.

 Your administrator can also hold, delete, or restart a print job if
 necessary. This can be done if a problem with the printer, such as a paper
 jam, caused printing to stop.

   To hold a print job:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the queue in which you
       have a print job.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Printer queues.

       The "Print Queues on \\computername" dialog box (Figure 4.2) appears.

   3.  In the list box, select the print job that you want to hold. Then
       choose <Hold>.


 The job remains held until you release it.

   To release a print job:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the queue in which you are
       holding a print job.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Printer queues.

       The "Print Queues on \\computername" dialog box (Figure 4.2) appears.

   3.  In the list box, select the print job you want to release. Then choose
       <Release>.

   4.  Choose <Done>.


   To delete a print job:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the queue in which you
       have a print job.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Printer queues.

       The "Print Queues on \\computername" dialog box (Figure 4.2) appears.

   3.  In the list box, select the print job you want to delete. Then choose
       <Delete>.

   4.  When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To hold, release, or delete a print job:


   1.  Get the job number by typing

       net print {\\computername[\sharename] | devicename}

   2.  Take the desired action by typing

       net print {\\computername | devicename} job# {/hold | /release |
       /delete}


 See Net Print, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Disconnecting from a Shared Printer Queue

 You can disconnect your workstation from a printer queue when you are
 finished using the resource or when you want to use the devicename for a
 different connection.

   To disconnect your workstation from a printer queue:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The "Resources in Use by username at \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 4.3) appears.

   2.  In the list box, select the printer queue that you want to disconnect
       your workstation from.

   3.  Choose <Stop using>.

   4.  When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To disconnect your workstation from a printer queue, type

 net use devicename /delete

 See Net Use, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."






 Chapter 5  Sending and Receiving Messages
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 With LAN Manager Enhanced, you can exchange messages with other network
 users. In addition, servers can send messages that inform you of conditions
 that require your attention or of print jobs that are finished.

 The Messenger service must be started to receive messages from other users
 and from servers on the network. Messages are stored in a message log.

 The Netpopup service displays messages as they are received. It displays a
 message box for one minute on your computer's screen. If the Netpopup
 service is paused, you can read your messages in the message log. If you are
 not running the Netpopup service or the Messenger service, you will not be
 able to read messages that your workstation receives.However, the
 workstation will emit a beep when a message arrives.

 This chapter discusses how to use the LAN Manager Enhanced message exchange
 features. The procedures for sending a message or file, reading and managing
 your message log, and adding or deleting an alias are provided.


 Sending Messages

 The Messenger service does not need to be running for you to send a message.
 However, it must be running for your workstation to receive messages.

 You can send a message to an alias on the network or to a domain. An alias
 is a unique name to which messages can be sent. A workstation can have three
 kinds of aliases:


   ş   A computername, which is an alias when the workstation is added

   ş   An alias added with the Message menu's Alias command or the net name
       command

   ş   A username


 A username is not necessarily included as an alias at a workstation. This is
 because an alias must be unique on the network, but a user can be logged on
 at more than one workstation at a time. If a user logs on at several
 workstations, the username will only be added as an alias to the first
 workstation at which the user logs on.

 A domain name is used like an alias for sending messages. Messages sent to a
 domain name are received by all workstations and servers that specify the
 domain as the workstation domain.

   To send a message:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Send a typed message.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The "Name" option button is selected.

   2.  To send a message to a user, in the "Name" text box, specify who is to
       receive the message.

       If you are sending to more than one user, separate the names with a
       space. If you want a copy of the message, you can specify your own
       alias.

   3.  To send a message to all users in a domain, select the "Domain" option
       button, and type the domain name.

   4.  In the "Message" text box, type your message.

       Messages sent to all users in a domain cannot exceed 128 characters.

   5.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To send a message:


   ş   Send a message with one line by typing

       net send alias message

   ş   Send a message with multiple lines by typing

       net send alias message (line 1) message (line 2) [...]

       When you finish, press ENTER, then F6 (or CTRL+Z), then ENTER again.



   ş   Send a file as a message by typing

       net send alias <filename
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Limit your file to 256 bytes, which is approximately one-quarter of a screen
 of text. If the file is larger, the message may not be
 received.<$Messages;size limit for files sent as



 See Net Send, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Reading Messages

 There are two ways to read messages: through the Netpopup service or through
 the message log.

 To receive messages, you must have the Messenger service running. If you
 want to see messages as they arrive, the Netpopup service must also be
 running.These services, by default, are started when the Workstation service
 is started.

 A message log is a file that stores messages when they're received. The
 default message log file resides in the LANMAN.DOS\LOGS directory.


 Using the Netpopup Service

 When the Netpopup service is running, each new message is displayed in a
 message box on your screen.

 The Messenger service must be running for the Netpopup service to display
 messages.

 The following is a typical message box:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To remove the message box from the screen, press ESC. (Otherwise, the
 message box is displayed for one minute, then disappears.)

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The Netpopup service requires that the Winpopup service be running if you
 are using Microsoft Windows(tm) with LAN Manager Enhanced. The Winpopup
 service is installed with the Setup program. If you are using Microsoft
 Windows and the Winpopup service is not installed, see your administrator.

 Command Line
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

   To pause or continue the Netpopup service, type

 net pause netpopup

 net continue netpopup

 See Net Pause and Net Continue, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Reading Your Message Log

 A message log is a file that stores the workstation's messages. By default,
 LAN Manager Enhanced uses MESSAGES.LOG in the LANMAN.DOS\LOGS directory for
 the message log.

 If the workstation receives messages for more than one user or alias, all
 messages are stored in the same message log. New messages are appended to
 the log.

   To read your message log:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Read message log file.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       You can scroll through the list box to read your messages.

   2.  To delete the contents of the current message log, choose <Clear log>

   3.  When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   4.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To read the message log, you can use a text editor or type

 type [drive:path] filename | more

 The filename is the name of your message log. For more information about the
 MS-DOS type and more commands, see your MS-DOS manual(s).


 Specifying a Different Message Log

 You can change the name of your message log.

   To change the name of the message log:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Log messages to file.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 5.1 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "New file" text box, type the pathname of the new file, or use
       the "Contents of path" list box and the <Dir> command button to select
       an existing filename.

       If you do not specify a path, the new message log is stored in the
       LANMAN.DOS\LOGS directory. If you type a filename without an
       extension, LAN Manager Enhanced attaches the .LOG extension.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To change the message log file that stores your messages,
 type

 net log [drive:path] filename

 See Net Log, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Stopping and Starting Message Logging

 You can stop and restart message logging.

   To stop or start message logging:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Log messages to file.

       The "Specify Message Log File" dialog box (Figure 5.1) appears.

   2.  Mark or unmark "Pause message logging."

       (An X in the check box means message logging is paused.)

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To stop or start message logging, type

 net log /off

 net log /on

 See Net Log, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Printing Messages

 Instead of storing your messages in a message log, you can print messages as
 soon as they arrive.

   To print messages as they arrive, type

 net log devicename

 To resume storing messages in a message log, type

 net log [drive:path] filename

 See Net Log, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Using Aliases

 More than one person can receive messages at a workstation. Since only one
 user can log on at a workstation at any given time, you need to add an alias
 for each person using the workstation. However, you can't add an alias that
 is in use at another workstation.

 Aliases are deleted when the Messenger service is stopped. Therefore, each
 time that you restart the Messenger service, you'll need to add any aliases
 that you want on the workstation.


 Adding an Alias

 An alias can have as many as 15 characters.

   To add an alias to the workstation:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Aliases.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 5.2 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Choose <Add alias>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  In the "New alias" text box, type the new alias.

   4.  Choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To add an alias to the workstation, type

 net name alias /add

 See Net Name, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Deleting an Alias

 You can delete an alias on your workstation or an alias that is forwarded to
 your workstation.

   To delete an alias from the workstation:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Aliases.

       The "Aliases for Messaging" dialog box (Figure 5.2) appears.

   2.  In the list box, select the alias that you want to delete.

   3.  Choose <Delete>.

   4.  Choose <Done>.

       NOTE  You cannot delete the workstation's computername from the alias
       list.


 Command Line    To delete an alias from the workstation, type

 net name alias /delete

 See Net Name, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."






 Chapter 6  Customizing Your Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 LAN Manager Enhanced provides several ways to manage workstation resources.
 This chapter describes how to automatically connect the workstation to a set
 of shared resources (using a profile).It also describes how to control and
 adjust services, and how to view your workstation's configuration.


 Using Profiles

 A profile is a file that automatically connects your workstation to a group
 of shared resources. (The group of connections is defined when you save the
 profile). The connections are made when you load the profile.

 When you save a profile, LAN Manager Enhanced records your workstation's
 current network connections under the profile filename that you assign.
 Later, you can load the profile and regain the connections.

 For example, you may have a task that requires you to use a particular group
 of shared resources. You can connect your workstation to the resources and
 save the connections in a profile. Any time you need to perform the task,
 you can load the profile rather than make the connections individually.

 A profile is created using either the Config menu's Save profile command or
 the net save command. A profile is loaded with the Config menu's Load
 profile command or the net load command. Profiles are stored in the
 LANMAN.DOS\PROFILES directory unless you specify otherwise.

 One profileÄNETLOGON.PROÄhas a special purpose. If NETLOGON.PRO exists, it
 is loaded by default whenever a user logs on at a workstation. It is useful
 to save the connections you most often make in NETLOGON.PRO.

 NETLOGON.PRO is created if you don't specify a filename with the Config
 menu's Save profile command or the net save command. NETLOGON.PRO is loaded
 if you don't specify a filename with the Config menu's Load profile command
 or the net load command.


 Creating a Profile

 You can create a profile at any time to save a set of connections. This
 gives you the flexibility of having a set of connections specific to a task.


   To save your current connections in a profile:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Save profile.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Filename" text box, type the profile name (if you do not type
       an extension, LAN Manager Enhanced adds the .PRO extension).

       You can also use the "Contents of path" list box with the <Dir>
       command button to select a profile. This replaces the contents of the
       existing profile with the workstation's current connections. When
       prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To save your current connections in a profile, type

 net save [[drive:path] filename]

 See Net Save, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Loading a Profile

 You can load a profile to automatically connect your workstation to a group
 of shared resources.

   To load a profile:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Load profile.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Filename" text box, type the filename of the profile you want
       to load, or use the "Display files on" option and the "Contents of
       path" list box.

       If the profile is not in the workstation's LANMAN.DOS\PROFILES
       directory or in a directory on your computer's path, you must specify
       its full pathname. If you do not type a filename extension, LAN
       Manager Enhanced assumes the .PRO extension.

   3.  Select one of the "Load options:"

       ş   "Append to existing configuration" adds the profile's connections
           to your workstation's current connections

       ş   "Replace existing configuration" replaces your workstation's
           connections with the profile's connections


   4.  Choose <OK>.

       To view the new connections, from the View menu, choose Used
       resources.
 Command Line  
         To load a profile and view your new connections:



   1.  Load a profile by typing

       net load [[drive:path] filename]

   2.  View your new connections by typing

       net use


 See Net Load and Net Use, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Controlling Services

 LAN Manager Enhanced services are


   ş   The Workstation service, which lets you use network resources

   ş   The Messenger service, which lets you receive messages at your
       workstation

   ş   The Netpopup service, which displays messages on your screen


 The Workstation service must be running before the Messenger and Netpopup
 services can start.


 Pausing a Service

 Pausing a service puts it on hold. Unlike stopping, pausing does not cancel
 connections or change settings.

 When you pause the Workstation service, you can use your computer's
 devicenames for local resources instead of shared resources. For example,
 the LPT1: devicename might be assigned to a shared printer queue. By pausing
 the Workstation service, you can use the devicename for a printer attached
 to the LPT1 port on your computer.

 Pausing the Workstation service also pauses the Messenger and Netpopup
 services.

 Command Line    To pause a service, type

 net pause service

 See Net Pause, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Continuing a Service

 When a service is continued, it resumes running as it was before it was
 paused.

 Command Line    To continue a service, type

 net continue service

 See Net Continue, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Pausing and Continuing Connections to Resources

 In addition to pausing a service, you can pause your workstation's
 connections to shared directories or shared printer queues.

 When you pause connections, your workstation does not recognize the
 devicenames assigned to the connections. If you've assigned a local
 devicename to a network connection (for example, LPT1:), pausing the
 connection lets you use the devicename for a local resource.

 The drdr option is used with the net pause and net continue commands to
 pause and continue connections to shared directories. The prdr option is
 used to pause and continue connections to shared printer queues.

 Command Line    To pause and continue directory or printer queue
 connections:


   ş   Pause directory or printer queue connections by typing

       net pause {drdr | prdr}

   ş   Continue connections by typing

       net continue {drdr | prdr}


 See Net Pause and Net Continue, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference"


 Stopping the Workstation Service

 Stopping the Workstation service logs you off from the network. It also
 stops the Messenger and Netpopup services, deletes message aliases, and
 cancels network connections, .

 Command Line    To stop the Workstation service, type

 net stop workstation

 See Net Stop, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Adjusting Services

 LAN Manager Enhanced services are controlled by options, which have values
 that determine how the service will perform. When you start a service, you
 can adjust the values of these options for as long as the service is
 running. When you stop and restart the service, LAN Manager Enhanced
 restores default settings for the options.

 Default settings are determined by an initialization file called LANMAN.INI,
 which is stored in the LANMAN.DOS directory. This file lists each option and
 its default value.

 Always consult your administrator before you adjust the value of an option.


 Service options are listed in each service's net start reference page in
 Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."

 Command Line    To adjust a service's performance when you start it, type

 net start service [options]

 See Net Start Messenger, Net Start Netpopup, and Net Start Workstation,
 Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."


 Viewing the Workstation Configuration

 Your workstation configuration includes information such as your username
 and the domains that you participate in.

   To view your workstation's configuration:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Workstation options.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       An X in the "Messenger" and "Netpopup" fields means the services are
       running. These fields cannot be changed in this dialog box.

   2.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view your workstation's configuration, type

 net config workstation

 See Net Config Workstation, Chapter 7, "Enhanced Command Reference."






 Chapter 7  Enhanced Command Reference
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter provides a reference page for each LAN Manager Enhanced
 command. The purpose and syntax of the command, as well as comments,
 examples, and cross-references, are provided on each reference page.
 Reference pages are arranged in alphabetical order.


 Abbreviating Commands

 The reference pages spell out all command and service names. If a command
 has an abbreviation, it is listed on the command reference pages.You can
 abbreviate any command option by typing enough letters to distinguish it
 from the command's other options.


 Using /yes and /no Options

 Many LAN Manager Enhanced commands require confirmation to complete a task.
 To expedite the task, you can append the /yes or /no option to the command.
 These options can be abbreviated /y and /n.

 For example, the net logon command logs you on to the network.If a user is
 already logged on at a workstation, that user must be logged off before you
 can log on. If you want to log on at a workstation at which another user is
 logged on (your username is chrisj and your password is daffodil), type

   net logon chrisj daffodil

 LAN Manager Enhanced will return a series of prompts asking you to confirm
 logging off the current user and canceling the workstation's existing
 connections. You must type Y or press ENTER to proceed with the logon. To
 log on without getting any prompts, use the /y option. Type

   net logon chrisj daffodil /y


 Using Passwords with Commands

 Some commands require that you supply a password to connect to a shared
 resource. There are two ways to provide one:


   ş   Type the password with the command. For example, to provide the
       password petunia while assigning LPT1: to the LISTS shared directory
       on the \\ADMIN server, type

       net use lpt1: \\admin\lists petunia


   ş   Type an asterisk (*) instead of the password. LAN Manager Enhanced
       prompts you for the password. For example, type

       net use lpt1: \\admin\lists *


       LAN Manager Enhanced then displays this prompt:

       Type the password for \\ADMIN\LISTS:

       When you type the password at this prompt, the letters are not
       displayed. This keeps the password confidential.



 Controlling a Screen Display

 Some commands (for example, net help start workstation /options) produce
 more than one screenful of text.

 To stop the display from scrolling, press PAUSE or CTRL+S. To resume
 scrolling, press any key.

 You can also use the MS-DOS more command to scroll through one screenful at
 a time, for example:

   net help start workstation | more

 This displays one screenful of text. To display another screenful, press any
 key.


 Using Commands in Batch Files

 LAN Manager Enhanced commands can be used in batch programs (.BAT files),
 such as AUTOEXEC.BAT. For example, you can use commands to start the
 Workstation service, log on at the network, or make network connections.
 Command options can also be included in batch programs. To avoid confusion,
 do not abbreviate command options.


 Command Summary

 The following list tells what each LAN Manager Enhanced command does.

 net
   Starts the LAN Manager Screen.

 net access
   Displays or changes a user's permissions for a shared directory or file on
   a server.

 net config workstation
   Displays the current settings for the Workstation service.

 net continue
   Reactivates services or network connections suspended with the net pause
   command.

 net copy
   Copies files from a source to a destination.

 net help
   Displays a list of commands and topics for which you can get help, or
   provides help with a specific command or topic.

 net helpmsg
   Provides help with a LAN Manager Enhanced error message.

 net load
   Loads a profile.

 net log
   Controls or displays information about message logging.

 net logoff
   Logs a user off from the network.

 net logon
   Logs a user on to the network and sets the username, password, and domain
   at a workstation.

 net move
   Moves files from a source to a destination.

 net name
   Adds or deletes a message alias, or displays a workstation's list of
   aliases.

 net password
   Changes the password for a user account on a server or in a domain.

 net pause
   Pauses a service or network connections.

 net print
   Displays information about a shared printer queue or controls a user's
   print jobs.

 net save
   Creates a profile containing the workstation's connections to shared
   resources.

 net send
   Sends a message or short file to one or more users on the network.

 net start
   Starts a LAN Manager Enhanced service or displays services that are
   running. (Individual reference pages are provided for net start messenger,
   net start netpopup, and net start workstation.)

 net stop
   Stops the Workstation service.

 net time
   Synchronizes the workstation's clock with a server, or displays the time
   and date for a server or domain.

 net use
   Connects a workstation to or disconnects a workstation from a shared
   resource, or displays information about workstation connections.

 net view
   Displays a list of servers or displays resources that a server is sharing.

 net who
   Lists users logged on in a domain, at a server, or at a workstation. It
   also lists information about a user.







 Net
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net command starts the LAN Manager Screen.


 Syntax

 net [/mono]

 where

 /mono
   Improves the LAN Manager Screen on a computer with a monochrome screen
   display. Use this option if you have difficulty viewing the LAN Manager
   Screen on your computer.


 Comments

 After you type net, the LAN Manager Screen appears:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 From this screen, you can use menus and dialog boxes to perform network
 tasks rather than typing LAN Manager Enhanced commands at the MS-DOS prompt.


 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 The LAN Manager Screen            Chapter 2, "Getting Started"


 Net Access
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net access command displays or changes a user's permissions for a shared
 directory or file on a server.


 Syntax

 net access drive:pathname [/add name:permission[ ...]]

 net access drive:pathname [/change name:permission[ ...]]

 net access drive:pathname [/grant name:permission[ ...]]

 net access drive:pathname [/revoke name:permission[ ...]]

 where

 drive
   Is the devicename assigned to the shared directory containing the resource
   with permissions you want to change. This devicename must be assigned to a
   shared directory.

 pathname
   Is the resource with permissions you want to change.

 name
   Is one or more usernames or groupnames that are to gain or lose
   permissions.

 permission
   Is one to seven letters (RWCXDAP) specifying the types of permissions to
   be given to name for the resource.

 /add
   Creates a new set of permissions for a resource that has none assigned.
   You can type several name:permission strings separated by spaces. You must
   create a set of permissions for the resource before you can grant or
   revoke permissions. To keep control over the resource, give yourself P
   permission.

 /change
   Changes one or more users' permissions for a resource. You can type
   several name:permission strings separated by spaces.

 /grant
   Assigns additional permissions to a resource's existing set. You can type
   several name:permission strings separated by spaces.

 /revoke
   Cancels one or more users' permissions for a resource. You can type
   several name:permission strings separated by spaces.


 Comments

 Your administrator may have assigned you a home directory, which is a
 directory for your own personal use, on a server. After you connect to the
 server, this directory and the files on it can be controlled so that only
 certain users can have access to them. Permissions control a user's access
 to a file or directory.

 Permissions and what they allow the user to do are as follows:

 R (Read)
   Read and copy files, and view subdirectories.

 W (Write)
   Make changes to files.

 C (Create)
   Create files and subdirectories.

 X (Execute)
   Run a command or program.

 D (Delete)
   Remove files and subdirectories.

 A (Attributes)
   Change MS-DOS file attributes. For information about file attributes, see
   your MS-DOS manual(s).

 P (Permissions)
   Assign or alter permissions for a resource. Your administrator initially
   must give you this permission for a resource. Once you have it, you can
   use net access to assign permissions, including P, to other users or
   groups. If you create a new file or directory, be sure to assign yourself
   P permission. Otherwise, you will be denied further access to the
   resource.

 You must specify the devicename assigned to the shared directory and the
 pathname of the resource. When you specify a drive (or pathname) with net
 access, you get information about a resource's current set of permissions.
 The display looks similar to the following:

   Resource  Permissions                Permissions
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   D:\MASTERDIR
              BILLRA:RWCXDAP             *USERS:RWCDA
             *CORPOP:RWCDA

 This display lists the resource you specified and a two-column list of
 usernames and groupnames who can use the resource. Groupnames are designated
 by an asterisk (*). Following each username and groupname is a list of
 permissions assigned to it.

 You must have P permission for the resource to get information about it with
 net access.

 If you create a new file or directory and want to assign permissions to it,
 first use the /add option to specify which users and groups will have
 access. Be sure to add yourself (with P permission), or you'll be denied
 subsequent access.

 Use the /grant and /revoke options to add and cancel permissions for users
 and groups. Use the /change option to change existing permissions for a
 resource.

 If you create a file in a directory with permissions, the new file inherits
 the directory's permissions. Only if you want to change the file's
 permissions should you use the net access command.


 Examples


   a.  To view the permissions for the shared directory connected to the G:
       devicename, type

       net access g:


   b.  To add the user jamesro with read and write permissions to the users
       on the shared directory connected to the G: devicename, type

       net access g: /grant jamesro:rw



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Connecting to shared resources    Net Use

 Shared resources, permissions,    Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 and user accounts                 Guide


 Net Config Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net config workstation command displays the current settings for the
 Workstation service.


 Syntax

 net config workstation


 Comments

 The net config workstation command provides a way to check settings for the
 workstation, such as the logon domain and the username.


 Example

 To display the current settings for the workstation service, type

   net config workstation

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Controlling and adjusting         Chapter 6, "Customizing Your Workstation"
 services

 Changing settings when starting   Net Start Workstation
 the Workstation service


 Net Continue
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net continue command reactivates services or network connections
 suspended with the net pause command.


 Syntax

 net continue {workstation | messenger | netpopup | drdr | prdr}

 where

 workstation
   Continues all workstation connections, and the Messenger and Netpopup
   services.

 messenger
   Continues the Messenger service.

 netpopup
   Continues the Netpopup service.

 drdr
   Continues all workstation connections to shared directories.

 prdr
   Continues all workstation connections to shared printer queues.


 Comments

 The net continue command can be abbreviated as net cont.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Pausing and continuing a service  Chapter 6, "Customizing Your Workstation"
 or connections using the LAN
 Manager Screen

 Pausing a service or network      Net Pause
 connections


 Net Copy
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net copy command copies files from a source to a destination.


 Syntax

 net copy source[+source[+...]] [/a | /b] [destination [/a | /b] [/v]]

 where

 source
   Specifies one or more files, directories, or devicenames to be copied. You
   can specify multiple files by separating filenames with a plus sign (+) or
   by using MS-DOS wildcard characters.

 destination
   Specifies which file, directory, or devicename source will be copied to.
   You can use MS-DOS wildcard characters to specify multiple files.

 /a
   Treats the source or destination as ASCII text.

 /b
   Treats the source or destination as a binary file.

 /v
   Verifies that information was properly recorded on the destination disk.


 Comments

 The net copy command is similar to the MS-DOS copy command, but it is much
 faster for copying between directories on a server. You don't need to
 connect to shared directories to use the net copy command. LAN Manager
 Enhanced makes the connections for you during the copy.

 The net copy command is usually used to copy files, but source can also be a
 directory (to copy all files in the directory), a devicename (such as A: to
 copy all files in the current directory of drive A), or the MS-DOS con
 command (to copy what is typed at the keyboard). Also, destination can be a
 devicename (such as LPT1: to copy to the device connected to LPT1) or it can
 be a network path.

 If source is a filename, the file is assumed to be in the current directory
 on the current drive.

 If destination is an existing file, the file is overwritten. If destination
 is a file that does not already exist, a new file is created. The new file
 is given the same name, creation date, and creation time as the source file.


 If only a drive is specified as the destination, LAN Manager Enhanced copies
 to the current directory on that drive. If no drive is specified, the source
 is copied to the current drive.


 Using the /a or /b Option

 The /a and /b options perform differently depending on whether they follow
 source or destination. The /a option is in effect in both cases until the /b
 option is specified.

 The /a option causes the file to be treated as ASCII text:


   ş   Placed after the source, /a causes the copying to stop before the
       first end-of-file character

   ş   Placed after the destination, /a causes an end-of-file character to be
       added as the last character of the new file


 The /b option copies the file in binary format:


   ş   Placed after the source, /b copies all end-of-file characters

   ş   Placed after the destination, /b copies all but the last end-of-file
       character



 Using the /v Option

 The /v option verifies that each sector written on the destination disk is
 recorded properly. This slows down the net copy command.


 Example

 To copy the MAIL.DOC file from the LISTS directory on the \\SALES server to
 the ADDRESS directory of the \\SALES server, type

   net copy \\sales\lists\mail.doc \\sales\address

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Moving files                      Net Move

 MS-DOS copy command               Microsoft MS-DOS User's Guide and User's
                                   Reference


 Net Help
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net help command displays a list of commands and topics for which you
 can get help, or provides help with a specific command or topic.


 Syntax

 net help [command [/options] | topic]

 net command {/help | /?}

 where

 command
   Is the command you need help with (don't type net as part of command).

 topic
   Is the topic you need help with.

 /options
   Describes the available options of the command.

 /help
   Provides an alternative way to display the help text for a command.

 /?
   Displays the syntax for the command.

 To view a list of commands and topics for which help is available, type net
 help without options.


 Examples


   a.  To view a list of commands and topics for which help is available,
       type

       net help


   b.  To view information about the net load command, type

       net help load


       or

       net load /help

   c.  To view the syntax for the net load command, type

       net load /?


   d.  To view the options available for the net continue command, type

       net help continue /options



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Getting help while using the LAN  Chapter 2, "Getting Started"
 Manager Screen


 Net Helpmsg
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net helpmsg command provides help with a LAN Manager Enhanced error
 message.


 Syntax

 net helpmsg message#

 where

 message#
   Is the four-digit number of the LAN Manager Enhanced message that you need
   help with.


 Comments

 When a network operation fails, you will see a message similar to the
 following:

   NET2182: The requested service has already been started.

 LAN Manager Enhanced error messages are preceded by "net," but you don't
 need to type net with message#.

 The net helpmsg command provides an explanation of why an error occurred and
 tells you what action to take to solve the problem.


 Example

 To get help with LAN Manager Enhanced error message NET2182, type

   net helpmsg 2182

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Getting help while using the LAN  Chapter 2, "Getting Started"
 Manager Screen

 Getting help with LAN Manager     Net Help
 Enhanced commands





 Net Load
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net load command loads a profile.


 Syntax

 net load [[drive:path] filename]

 where

 drive:path
   Tells where the profile is stored. Without a drive letter and path, LAN
   Manager Enhanced assumes the profile is stored in the LANMAN.DOS\PROFILES
   directory.

 filename
   Is the name of the profile. If it has a .PRO extension, type only the name
   (without .PRO). If filename is omitted, the default profile, NETLOGON.PRO,
   is loaded.

 To restore connections made with the default profile, NETLOGON.PRO, type net
 load without options.


 Comments

 The net load command gives you an easy way to make connections to a set of
 shared resources by loading a profile.

 Loading a profile connects your workstation to the resources specified in
 the profile and cancels all existing connections. To see a list of your
 workstation's connections, use the net use command.

 A profile is created with the net save command, which records the
 workstation's current connections in a profile file.

 If NETLOGON.PRO exists, LAN Manager Enhanced automatically loads it each
 time that you log on to the network.


 Examples


   a.  To load a profile called BUDGET.PRO, type

       net load budget


   b.  To restore connections made with NETLOGON.PRO, type

       net load


       LAN Manager Enhanced reminds you of the existing connections and asks
       whether you want to cancel them. Type Y to load NETLOGON.PRO.

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Using profiles                    Chapter 6, "Customizing Your Workstation"

 Creating profiles                 Net Save




 Net Log
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net log command controls or displays information about message logging.


 Syntax

 net log [[drive:path] filename | devicename] [/on | /off]

 where

 drive:path
   Tells where the message log file is stored. Without a drive letter and
   path, LAN Manager Enhanced assumes the file is to be stored in the
   LANMAN.DOS\LOGS directory.

 filename
   Is the name of the message log file. If it has a .LOG extension, type only
   the name (without .LOG). By default, messages are saved in the
   MESSAGES.LOG file.

 devicename
   Is the name of a device at your computer connected to a printer queue.
   This name can be an LPT: devicename. Messages are printed as they're
   received.

 /on
   Starts message logging.

 /off
   Stops message logging.

 To display information about message logging, type net log without options.



 Comments

 Message logging is on by default when the Messenger service is started.

 The net log command controls the way messages are saved. You can stop and
 start message logging, change the name of the file that stores the messages,
 or have messages printed as they're received.

 You can read the message log file with the MS-DOS type command.

 You can stop message logging with the /off option and still view messages if
 the Netpopup service is running. But if the Netpopup service is stopped and
 message logging is off, your workstation emits a beep when a message is
 received but neither displays nor logs the message.


 Examples


   a.  To see whether message logging is on and the message log filename,
       type

       net log


   b.  To change the name of the message log file from MESSAGES.LOG to
       NOVEMBER.LOG, type

       net log november


   c.  To print messages directly to the printer attached to LPT1, type

       net log lpt1:



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Logging messages                  Chapter 5, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Starting the Messenger service    Net Start Messenger


 Net Logoff
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net logoff command logs a user off from the network.


 Syntax

 net logoff


 Comments

 The net logoff command removes a username and password at a workstation.
 Logging off does not stop the Workstation service. It simply ensures that no
 unauthorized person can use your username and password to gain access to
 shared resources. Logging off cancels all of a workstation's connections.

 You cannot log off if you are using a shared directory. Before using net
 logoff, you must change to a local drive on your computer.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Starting LAN Manager Enhanced     Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Logging on                        Net Logon


 Net Logon
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net logon command logs a user on to the network and sets the username,
 password, and domain at a workstation.


 Syntax

 net logon [username [password | *]] [/domain:name]

 where

 username
   Is the name by which you identify yourself on the network (username can
   have as many as 20 characters).

 password
   Is the password for your account.

 *
   Produces a password prompt. The password is not displayed when you type
   it.

 /domain:name
   Logs you on in a domain other than your workstation domain. This domain is
   called the logon domain.

 To be prompted for a username and a password, type net logon without
 options.


 Comments

 The net logon command establishes your username and password at a
 workstation. These are used to log you on in a domain and grant you access
 to shared resources. Logging on also loads the default profile,
 NETLOGON.PRO, if it exists.

 Only one user can be logged on at a workstation at a time.

 You can use net logon to log on with another username or to log on in
 another domain, but you must first log off.


 About Usernames

 If you don't specify a username with net logon, a username is suggested.
 This username comes from the username entry of the LANMAN.INI file. If this
 entry is blank, the computername is suggested.


 About Passwords

 A password is a confidential word which, together with your username,
 establishes your identity and gives you access to resources. When you log on
 to the network or connect to a shared resource, your workstation sends your
 username and password specified with net logon to a server for verification.
 The server checks to see if it has an account for you and if the logon
 password you specified matches the password in your account.

 LAN Manager Enhanced uses accounts in two ways. In a domain, a server
 maintains an account for each user. Once you log on, you can use all the
 resources in the domain to which your account is granted access. Accounts
 are also used by individual servers to limit access to their resources.


 What Is a Domain?

 A domain is a group of computers on the network. Domains are set up by an
 administrator. If you don't specify a /domain:name, LAN Manager Enhanced
 logs you on in your workstation domain, which is designated by the domain
 entry in the LANMAN.INI file.

 Your workstation domain probably includes the workstations and servers you
 most often work with. When you specify a /domain:name, you are logged on in
 a domain other than the workstation domain. This domain is called the logon
 domain.

 Servers visible in the workstation domain, the logon domain, and the domains
 listed in the othdomains entry of the LANMAN.INI file are displayed with the
 net view command. Your workstation will also receive messages sent to all of
 these domains.

 When you log on in a domain, you get access to most of the shared resources
 in the domain. Being logged on in one domain doesn't limit access to
 resources in other domains.


 Examples


   a.  To log on in your workstation domain, type

       net logon


       LAN Manager Enhanced asks you for a username, then asks for a
       password.

   b.  To log on with the username felix and be prompted for a password, type

       net logon felix *


       You see the following display:

       Type your password:

       Your password is not displayed as you type it.

   c.  To log on in the accounting domain with the username felix and the
       password freddy, type

       net logon felix freddy /domain:accounting



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Logging on to and off from the    Chapter 2, "Getting Started"
 network

 Logging off                       Net Logoff

 Changing your password            Net Password


 Net Move
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net move command moves files from a source to a destination.


 Syntax

 net move source [destination]

 where

 source
   Is the pathname of one or more files to be moved. Specify multiple
   filenames by using MS-DOS wildcard characters.

 destination
   Is the pathname to which source is moved. If more than one file is moved,
   destination must be a directory. If destination is omitted, files are
   moved to the current directory. LAN Manager Enhanced won't overwrite an
   existing file during a move. If destination is an existing file, the move
   is canceled.


 Comments

 Use this command to move files between any two directories you have access
 to on the network.

 Moving a file is different from copying a file. Moving relocates the file;
 copying makes a duplicate. The moved file is given the date and time that
 the move occurred.

 You can move files between two remote computers. For instance, while working
 at workstation A, you can move files between servers B and C. You don't need
 to connect to shared directories to use net move. LAN Manager Enhanced makes
 the connections for you.


 Example

 To move all files in drive C's TEXT directory to the BUDGET directory on the
 \\ADMIN server's REPORTS shared directory, type

   net move c:\text\*.* \\admin\reports\budget

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Copying files                     Net Copy


 Net Name
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net name command adds or deletes a message alias, or displays a
 workstation's list of aliases.


 Syntax

 net name [alias [/add | /delete]]

 where

 alias
   Is the alias that you want to add or delete. An alias is a name to which a
   message can be sent.

 /add
   Adds an alias to the workstation. Typing /add is optional; typing net name
   alias performs the same task.

 /delete
   Removes an alias from the workstation.

 To display a list of aliases in use at the workstation, type net name
 without options.


 Comments

 A workstation can have three kinds of aliases, each receiving messages:


   ş   The workstation's computername, which is added when the Workstation
       service is started

   ş   Your username, which is added when you log on, provided your are not
       logged on elsewhere on the network

   ş   Aliases for messaging, which are added with net name



 Receiving Messages

 Messages can only be received by a workstation if the Messenger service is
 running. If the Netpopup service is also running, a message box displays the
 message on your screen. If message logging is on, the message is sent to the
 message log. If the Netpopup service and message logging are both off, you
 will only hear a beep when your workstation receives a message. The message
 is neither saved nor logged in the message log.

 A workstation receives messages sent to any of its aliases. A user does not
 have to be logged on at the workstation for the aliases at the workstation
 to receive messages.


 Adding and Deleting an Alias

 You can't add an alias to your workstation if it is already in use on the
 network. Similarly, you can't start the Workstation service with a
 computername that is being used as an alias at another workstation.

 You can log on with a username that is being used elsewhere as an alias, but
 the username isn't added as an alias to your workstation. Therefore, you
 will not receive messages for that username at your workstation.

 The /delete option is used to remove an alias. You can delete any alias in
 use at your workstation except the computername.

 Logging off deletes your username alias. Other aliases at the workstation,
 including the computername, still receive messages as long as the
 Workstation service is running.


 Examples


   a.  To view the list of aliases at your workstation, type

       net name


   b.  To add the alias juliewo to your workstation, type

       net name juliewo


   c.  To remove the alias juliewo from your workstation, type

       net name juliewo /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Messages                          Chapter 5, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Saving your messages in a file    Net Log

 Sending messages                  Net Send


 Net Password
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net password command changes the password for a user account on a server
 or in a domain.


 Syntax

 net password [[\\computername | /domain:name] username oldpassword
 newpassword]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the server at which the password will be changed.

 username
   Is your username.

 oldpassword
   Is your current password.

 newpassword
   Is the new password, which can have as many as 14 characters.

 /domain:name
   Specifies a domain other than the workstation domain in which the password
   will be changed.

 To be prompted for the name of the domain or server, your username, old
 password, and new password, type net password without options.


 Comments

 User accounts are set up to control a user's access to shared resources on a
 server or in a domain. An account includes the username and password for a
 user.Accounts perform similar functions on servers and in domains. The
 difference is that an account in a domain controls access to most of the
 resources shared on the servers in the domain, rather than just one server's
 resources.

 If you don't supply a \\computername or a /domain:name, LAN Manager Enhanced
 assumes you are changing the password for your account in the workstation
 domain.


 Keeping Passwords Confidential

 To keep your password confidential, you can type an asterisk (*) instead of
 typing a password. You are then prompted for your password, which is not
 displayed as you type it. LAN Manager Enhanced asks for the new password
 twice to ensure that it is correct.

 If you forget your password, see your administrator for a new one. You can
 then use net password to change the new password to one that you want.


 Examples


   a.  To change your password for the \\PRODUCTION server from petunia to
       daffodil (your username is robertch), type

       net password \\production robertch petunia daffodil


       To make the same change, but have LAN Manager Enhanced prompt you for
       a new password that won't be displayed when you type it, type

       net password \\production robertch petunia *

   b.  To change your password in your workstation domain from carnation to
       orchid, type

       net password robertch carnation orchid


   c.  To change your password in the accounting domain from magnolia to
       orchid, type

       net password /domain:accounting robertch magnolia orchid



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Passwords                         Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Logging on with a password        Net Logon


 Net Pause
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net pause command pauses a service or network connections.


 Syntax

 net pause {workstation | messenger | netpopup | drdr | prdr}

 where

 workstation
   Pauses all workstation connections.

 messenger
   Pauses the Messenger service.

 netpopup
   Pauses the Netpopup service.

 drdr
   Pauses all workstation connections to shared directories.

 prdr
   Pauses all workstation connections to shared printer queues.


 Comments

 Pausing the workstation puts it on hold and keeps your username and password
 active. The workstation is reactivated with the net continue command.

 Pausing connections allows you to use a devicename for a device at your
 computer instead of a shared resource. For example, the LPT1: devicename can
 be connected to a shared printer queue with a laser printer. If LPT1: is
 also used for a dot-matrix printer at your computer, you can pause the
 network connection and print a quick draft at your computer. To send print
 jobs back to the shared printer queue, reactivate the connection with the
 net continue command.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Continuing a paused service or    Net Continue
 connection

 Stopping the Workstation service  Net Stop


 Net Print
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net print command displays information about a shared printer queue or
 controls a user's print jobs.


 Syntax

 net print {\\computername[\sharename] | devicename}

 net print {\\computername | devicename} [job# [/hold | /release | /delete]]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server sharing the printer queue(s).

 sharename
   Is the name of the printer queue.

 devicename
   Is the name of the device at your computer assigned to the queue.

 job#
   Is the identification number assigned to a queued print job. Job numbers
   are unique on the server.

 /hold
   Suspends a print job. A suspended print job is not printed until the
   /release option reactivates it.

 /release
   Reactivates a print job that is on hold.

 /delete
   Cancels a print job.


 Comments

 The net print command shows you where in a printer queue a print job is, and
 it lets you hold, release, or delete a job.

 Sending a job to a printer queue usually requires connecting to the queue
 with the net use command and then submitting the print job through an
 application program. But you can also send a job to a queue with the net
 copy or MS-DOS copy command.

 When you specify a computername (for example, \\SALES) with net print, you
 get information about the printer queues being shared on that server. You
 don't need to make a connection to a queue to get information about it. The
 display is similar to the following:

   Printer Queues at \\SALES
   Name                 Job #   Size      Status
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   LASER Queue         3 jobs             *Queue Active*
        JACKST            1     2509      Printing on LPT1
        JENNYT            3       75      Waiting
        JENNYT            4       75      Waiting
   PRT Queue           2 jobs             *Queue Active*
        BENST             5      180      Printing on LPT2
        JOHNOC            6      512      Waiting

 The columns of this display give the following information:

 Name
   The sharename of each printer queue. Listed beneath the sharename are the
   usernames of people who sent print jobs.

 Job #
   The number of print jobs in each printer queue. Listed beneath the number
   of jobs is the unique identification number of each job in the queue.

 Size
   The size of each print job, in bytes.

 Status
   The status of either the printer queue or a print job.

 The status of a printer queue is controlled by an administrator. It can be


   ş   ActiveÄAvailable to receive print jobs

   ş   HeldÄSuspended

   ş   Held untilÄSuspended until the time displayed

   ş   Pending deleteÄBeing shut down

   ş   ErrorÄUnavailable due to malfunction


 The status of a print job can be


   ş   Printing on devicenameÄPrinting on the printer attached to the
       server's devicename

   ş   SpoolingÄTransferring into the printer queue

   ş   WaitingÄWaiting for a printer to become available

   ş   HeldÄHeld by the user with the /hold option

   ş   Held on devicenameÄHeld because an administrator held the queue

   ş   PausedÄPaused by the user or an administrator

   ş   Out of paper on devicenameÄStopped because paper ran out

   ş   Error on devicenameÄStopped because of a malfunction

   ş   Offline on devicenameÄStopped because the printer is offline



 Examples


   a.  To see the printer queues shared on the \\PRODUCTION server, type

       net print \\production


   b.  To learn about the DOTM queue on the \\PRODUCTION server, type

       net print \\production\dotm


   c.  If your computer's LPT1: devicename is connected to the \\PRODUCTION
       server's LASER queue, display the contents of the queue by typing

       net print lpt1:


       or

       net print \\production\laser

   d.  To cancel a print job with the job identification number 7 on the
       \\PRODUCTION server connected to your computer's LPT1: devicename,
       type

       net print \\production 7 /delete


       or

       net print lpt1: 7 /delete

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Shared printers                   Chapter 4, "Using Shared Printers"

 Copying a print job to a printer  Net Copy
 queue

 Connecting to a printer queue     Net Use

 Viewing servers and queues        Net View







 Net Save
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net save command creates a profile containing the workstation's
 connections to shared resources.


 Syntax

 net save [[drive:path] filename]

 where

 drive:path
   Tells where the profile is stored. Without a drive letter and path, LAN
   Manager Enhanced creates the profile in the LANMAN.DOS\PROFILES directory.

 filename
   Is the name of the profile. If filename is typed without an extension, a
   .PRO extension is added.

 To save your workstation's connections in the default profile, NETLOGON.PRO,
 type net save without options.


 Comments

 When you save a profile, LAN Manager Enhanced creates a file that contains a
 record of your workstation's current connections. When the profile is
 loaded, LAN Manager Enhanced makes the connections listed in the file.

 If you specify a profile that already exists, you see this warning message:


   This file already exists. Do you want to overwrite it? (Y/N) [N]:

 By saving separate profiles, you can conveniently make quick connections to
 sets of shared resources that you use only at certain times. Or, if others
 use your workstation, each user can have a personal profile.

 Another use of net save is to save connections temporarily if for some
 reason you must stop the Workstation service.


 Examples


   a.  To save your workstation's current connections in NETLOGON.PRO, type

       net save


   b.  A coworker uses your workstation regularly, and she uses shared
       directories that you don't use. She saves her profile under the name
       jane by typing

       net save jane



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Profiles                          Chapter 6, "Customizing Your Workstation"

 Loading profiles                  Net Load


 Net Send
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net send command sends a message or short file to one or more users on
 the network.


 Syntax

 net send {alias | * | /domain[:name] | /broadcast} message

 where

 alias
   Is the username, computername, or other name to send the message to.

 message
   Is the text of the message or the complete pathname of a text file
   (preceded by <) to be sent.

 *
   Sends the message to all aliases in your workstation domain.

 /domain[:name]
   Sends the message to all aliases in your workstation domain. If name is
   specified, the message is sent to all aliases in the specified domain.

 /broadcast
   Sends the message to all aliases on the network.


 Comments

 Use the net send command to send a message to a user, users in a domain, or
 all users on the network.

 An alias must be active on the network to receive a message, and the
 Messenger service must be running on the receiving workstation.

 The size of a message that a workstation can receive is limited. This limit
 is set with the sizmessbuf entry in the LANMAN.INI file. By default, LAN
 Manager Enhanced workstations can receive messages of up to 256 bytes. Limit
 your messages to 256 bytes to ensure that the entire message will be
 received.

 The simplest way to send a message is to type it from the command line. A
 longer message can be typed over several lines by pressing ENTER after net
 send alias and after each line of text, then pressing CTRL+Z or F6 and ENTER
 to send the message.

 LAN Manager Enhanced provides several ways to broadcast a message (send it
 to many users). You can broadcast messages to all aliases in your
 workstation domain (use * or /domain), a different domain (/domain:name), or
 the entire network (/broadcast). Broadcast messages must be 128 characters
 or fewer. Use this feature with discretion.


 Examples


   a.  To send the message "Meeting changed to 3 p.m. Same place." to the
       alias jackst, type

       net send jackst Meeting changed to 3 p.m. Same place.


       Another way to type this message is

       net send jackst
       Meeting changed to 3 p.m.
       Same place.

       To send this message, press CTRL+Z or F6, then ENTER.

   b.  To send the small text file INVITE.DOC to all aliases in the legal
       domain, type

       net send /domain:legal <invite.doc


   c.  To inform everyone in your workstation domain that a party is being
       held in the cafeteria, type

       net send * There's a party in the cafeteria!



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Messages                          Chapter 5, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Saving or printing messages       Net Log

 Adding aliases                    Net Name

 Using the Messenger service       Net Start Messenger


 Net Start Messenger
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start messenger command starts the Messenger service.


 Syntax

 net start [messenger [options]]

 where

 options are as follows:

     /logfile:pathname
       Assigns a pathname for the message log file. The default message log
       file pathname is LANMAN.DOS\LOGS\MESSAGES.LOG.

     /nummsgnames:number
       Sets the allowable number of message aliases for a workstation. The
       range is 1-10; the default is 2 aliases.

     /sizmessbuf:bytes
       Sets the size (in bytes) of the message buffer, limiting the size of
       messages the workstation can receive. The range is 128-62000; the
       default is 256 bytes.

 To display a list of services that are running at the workstation, type net
 start without options.


 Comments

 The Messenger service must be started in order for the workstation to
 receive messages.

 A message is sent to a workstation's alias with the net send command. LAN
 Manager Enhanced uses three types of aliasesÄa computername, a username, and
 an alias added with the net name command.

 There are two ways a workstation can receive messages sent to its aliases:


   ş   If the Netpopup and Messenger services are running, a message box
       displays each message on the workstation's screen.

   ş   If message logging is on, the incoming message is sent to a message
       log file or a printer. The net log command controls message logging.


 Changes made with the net start messenger command remain in effect only as
 long as the Messenger service is running.


 Example

 To start the Messenger service with a message buffer of 5120 bytes, type

   net start messenger /sizmessbuf:5120

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Messages                          Chapter 5, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Logging messages                  Net Log

 Adding aliases                    Net Name

 Sending messages                  Net Send

 Starting the Netpopup service     Net Start Netpopup

 Starting the Workstation service  Net Start Workstation


 Net Start Netpopup
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start netpopup command starts the Netpopup service.


 Syntax

 net start [netpopup]

 To display a list of services that are running at the workstation, type net
 start without options.


 Comments

 The Netpopup service lets you see messages as they arrive at your
 workstation. The Messenger service must be running for the workstation to
 receive messages.

 The message display is similar to the following:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The message box disappears after one minute or when you press the ESC key.

 If message logging is on, the message is saved in the message log file. If
 message logging is off, messages are discarded after they're displayed.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Messages                          Chapter 5, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Controlling network services      Net Continue, Net Pause, Net Stop

 Logging messages                  Net Log

 Starting the Messenger service    Net Start Messenger


 Net Start Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start workstation command starts the Workstation service, optionally
 adjusting settings that affect the workstation's performance.


 Syntax

 net start [workstation [options]]

 Command options are grouped in the following five categories:

 Names
   Assign a name to your computer or specify parts of the network you'll work
   with.

 Times
   Specify how long the workstation waits for events to happen.

 Sizes
   Allocate memory or disk space for the workstation's use.

 Services
   Specify which services start with the Workstation service.

 Heuristics
   Adjust settings that determine how the workstation operates on the
   network.

 Each option corresponds to an entry in the [workstation] section of the
 LANMAN.INI file. When you specify a net start workstation option, you
 override the corresponding LANMAN.INI entryÄbut only until the next time
 that you start the workstation.

 Names

 /computername:name
   Is a unique name that identifies the workstation on the network. If the
   computername matches any of the following on the network, the workstation
   will not start:


   ş   a computername on anyone else's computer

   ş   a username on anyone else's computer

   ş   a domain name on the network

   ş   an alias on your computer or anyone else's


   Computernames can have 1-15 characters, including letters, numbers, and
   the following symbols:

   ! # $ % & ` ( ) - . @ ^ _ { } ~

 /domain:name
   Is the name of the workstation domain. The range is 1-15 characters.

 /lanroot:name
   Is the name of the root directory in which LAN Manager Enhanced software
   is stored. The default is LANMAN.DOS.

 /othdomains:name[,...]
   Specifies one or more domains that the workstation belongs to (as many as
   four, separated by commas).

 /wrknets:number
   Specifies one or more networks in which the workstation participates.
   Networks are represented by LANA numbers 0-254 and are separated by
   commas.

 Times

 /chartime:msec
   Specifies the number of milliseconds that LAN Manager Enhanced collects
   data before sending it to a named pipe. If /charcount:bytes is satisfied
   first, LAN Manager Enhanced acts on that entry. The range is -1 (never) to
   65535000; the default is 250 milliseconds.

 /charwait:sec
   Specifies the number of seconds that LAN Manager Enhanced waits for a
   named pipe to become available. The range is 0-65535; the default is 128
   seconds.

 /keepconn:sec
   Specifies the number of seconds that LAN Manager Enhanced maintains a
   connection you're not using before breaking it. The range is 1-65535; the
   default is 600 seconds.

 /keepsearch:sec
   Specifies the number of seconds that LAN Manager Enhanced maintains a
   directory search request before discarding it. The range is 1-65535; the
   default is 600 seconds.

 Sizes

 /charcount:bytes
   Specifies the amount of data that LAN Manager Enhanced collects before
   sending it to a named pipe. If /chartime:msec is satisfied first, LAN
   Manager Enhanced acts on that entry. The range is 1-65535; the default is
   16 bytes.

 /himem:{yes | no | optional}
   Specifies whether high memory allocation is used by the workstation. If
   optional is selected, the workstation determines when to use high memory
   allocation based on the hmamin entry of HIMEM.SYS (see the Microsoft LAN
   Manager Installation Guide). The workstation must have an expanded memory
   board and the appropriate device driver installed to use yes or optional.
   The default is no.

 /keepapis:{yes | no}
   Specifies whether LAN Manager Enhanced application program interfaces
   (APIs) are available to application programs. If no is selected, only
   named pipe APIs are available; the LAN Manager Screen and some LAN Manager
   commands will not work. Note that if APIs are not desired, the Setup
   program should be used to reinstall LAN Manager Enhanced without APIs, or
   to install LAN Manager Basic. The default is yes.

 /lim:{yes | no}
   Specifies whether LIM expanded memory is used by the workstation. The
   workstation must have LIM version 4.0 installed to use yes. The default is
   yes.

 /mailslots:{yes | no}
   Determines whether the workstation can receive second-class mailslots and
   server announcements. The default is yes.

 /maxcmds:n
   Specifies the number of NetBIOS commands LAN Manager Enhanced workstation
   software can run simultaneously. The range is 5-255; the default is 11
   NetBIOS commands.

 /maxthreads:n
   Specifies the number of processes that can use LAN Manager simultaneously.
   The range is 10-254; the default is 20.

 /numbigbuf :n
   Specifies the number of big buffers the workstation uses to receive large
   files or amounts of data from servers. Buffer size is set with the
   /sizbigbuf entry. The range is 0-255; the default is 0 buffers.

 /numcharbuf:n
   Specifies the number of character and pipe buffers the workstation uses.
   The range is 0-15; the default is 2 buffers.

 /numdgrambuf:n
   Specifies the number of buffers available for receiving information
   (datagrams) from a server. The range is 3-112; the default is 3 buffers.

 /nummailslots:n
   Specifies the number of mailslots available on the workstation. The range
   is 0-255; the default is 2 mailslots.

 /numresources:n
   Specifies the maximum number of connections to shared resources allowed on
   the workstation at a time. The range is 1-255; the default is 9
   connections.

 /numservers:n
   Specifies the maximum number of servers to which the workstation can have
   active connections at a time. The range is 1-255; the default is 9
   servers.

 /numservices:n
   Sets the size of the internal service table. This number should be greater
   than or equal to the number of entries in the [services] section of the
   LANMAN.INI file. The range is 1-255; the default is 5 services.

 /numviewedservers:n
   Specifies the maximum number of servers that can be viewed with the net
   view command. The range is 0-255; the default is 50 servers.

 /numworkbuf:n
   Specifies the number of buffers the workstation uses. The range is 3-50;
   the default is 5 buffers.

 /sizbigbuf:bytes
   Specifies the size of big buffers used to receive large files or amounts
   of data. The /numbigbuf entry sets the number of buffers. The range is
   0-65535; the default is 4096 bytes.

 /sizcharbuf:bytes
   Specifies the size in bytes of each character and pipe buffer. The range
   is 64-4096; the default is 128 bytes.

 /sizworkbuf:bytes
   Specifies the size in bytes of each workstation buffer. The range is
   64-4096; the default is 1024 bytes.

 Services

 /wrkservices:service[,...]
   Lists LAN Manager Enhanced services that start automatically when the
   Workstation service starts. Names are separated by commas. Service names
   cannot be abbreviated.

 Heuristics

 /wrkheuristics:string
   Are settings for fine-tuning the workstation's performance. For a
   description of each heuristic, see the Microsoft LAN Manager
   Administrator's Reference.

 If you're accustomed to using Microsoft Networks for MS-DOS version 1.0 or
 IBM(R) PC-LAN version 1.2, you can still use the following net start
 workstation options:

 /b:n or /nbc:n
   Sets the number of workstation buffers (same as /numworkbuf:n).

 /z:n or /nbs:n
   Sets the size of the workstation's buffers (same as /sizworkbuf:bytes).


 Comments

 Workstation can be abbreviated as wksta, work, redirector, redir, or rdr.
 You must start the Workstation service to use LAN Manager Enhanced.

 To display a list of services that are running at the workstation, type net
 start without options.

 When assigning a computername while starting the Workstation service, typing
 /computername:name is optional; typing net start workstation computername
 performs the same task.


 Example

 To start a workstation with the computername \\FINANCIAL and the logon
 domain legal , type

   net start workstation finance /domain:legal

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Starting LAN Manager              Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Pausing the Workstation service   Net Pause

 Stopping the Workstation service  Net Stop

 The LANMAN.INI file               Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Reference


 Net Stop
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net stop command stops the Workstation service.


 Syntax

 net stop workstation


 Comments

 Stopping the Workstation service cancels any network connections the service
 is using and logs you off from the network. It also stops any other services
 that are running.

 Stopping the Workstation service differs from pausing it. Pausing it puts
 the service on hold and suspends any network connections. Before stopping
 the Workstation service, you may want to consider saving your current
 connections in a profile using net save. That way, you can easily restore
 the connections by using net load.

 Stopping the Workstation service does not remove software from your
 computer's memory. LAN Manager Enhanced is a "Terminate and Stay Resident"
 (TSR) program, which means that when it stops, it stays in your computer's
 memory. If other TSR programs are loaded into your computer's memory, the
 net stop command may not work.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 LAN Manager Enhanced services     Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Loading profiles                  Net Load

 Saving profiles                   Net Save

 Starting services                 Net Start Messenger, Net Start Netpopup,
                                   Net Start Workstation


 Net Time
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net time command synchronizes the workstation's clock with a server, or
 displays the time and date for a server or domain.


 Syntax

 net time [\\computername | /domain[:name]] [/set]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server you want to check or synchronize with.

 /domain[:name]
   Displays the time and date at your workstation domain controller or
   synchronizes with that server. Use name to specify a different domain.

 /set
   Synchronizes the workstation's clock with that of the specified server or
   domain.

 To display the current date and time for the server designated as the
 network's official time source, type net time without options.


 Comments

 This command provides a way to check whether your workstation's clock is
 properly synchronized with the clocks at servers.


 Examples


   a.  To see the time and date for the domain controller of the accounting
       domain, type

       net time /domain:accounting


   b.  To set your workstation's clock to the time and date on the network's
       designated time server, type

       net time /set




 Net Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net use command connects a workstation to or disconnects a workstation
 from a shared resource, or displays information about workstation
 connections.


 Syntax

 net use [devicename] [\\computername\sharename [password]]

 net use {devicename | \\computername\sharename} /delete

 where

 devicename
   Assigns a name to connect to the resource or specifies the devicename to
   be disconnected. LAN Manager Enhanced uses two kinds of devicenames: disk
   drives (D: through Z:) and printers (LPT1: through LPT3:).

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server sharing the resource.

 \sharename
   Is the name of the resource.

 password
   Is the password needed to use the resource. To be prompted for the
   password, type an asterisk (*) instead of the password. The password will
   not be displayed when you type it.

 /delete
   Cancels a network connection.

 To list the workstation's connections, type net use without options.


 Comments

 Connecting your workstation to a shared resource lets you use the resource
 as if it were attached to your computer.

 For example, net use can connect your workstation to a shared printer queue
 that uses a high-quality printer. When you use an application program, such
 as Microsoft Excel, you can print files on the printer by directing print
 jobs to the devicename assigned to the queue.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 You can use shared resources without making a connection with net use. The
 connection is made automatically by MS-DOS or by some network programs when
 you specify the network path of the resource with a command. But, if the
 resource is protected by a password, you must establish access with net use.
 You don't need to assign a devicename to establish access. Just type net
 use, the network path of the resource, and the password.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 You cannot delete a connection to a shared directory if it's your current
 drive. You must first change to another drive.


 Viewing Your Workstation's Connections

 When you type net use without options, you get information about the
 workstation's connections. You see a display similar to the following:

   Status          Local name    Remote name
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   OK              M:            \\FINANCIAL\SCRATCH
   DISCONNECTED    G:            \\PRODUCTION\C
   ERROR           LPT1:         \\PRINT1\LASER

 The "Status" of a connection can be


   ş   OKÄThe connection is active.

   ş   DisconnectedÄThe connection is suspended by the server but will be
       reestablished when you use it.

   ş   PausedÄThe connection is paused by the workstation.

   ş   ErrorÄThe connection has ended and must be deleted.


 "Local name" is the devicename assigned to the resource. "Remote name" is
 its network path.

 There are two ways to get information about a connection:


   ş   Type net use devicename.

   ş   Type net use and the network path of the resource. You must type this
       command twice: first to establish a connection to the resource, then
       to get information about it.


 Either method produces a display similar to the following:

   Local name            LPT1:
   Remote name           \\PRINT1\LASER
   Resource type         Print
   Status                OK
   #Opens                0
   #Connections          1

 "Resource type" is the type of resource being used (Disk or Printer).
 "#Opens" is the number of files currently open on this connection.
 "#Connections" is the number of connections the workstation has to the
 resource.


 Examples


   a.  To assign the devicename E: to the LETTERS directory on the
       \\FINANCIAL server, type

       net use e: \\financial\letters


   b.  To assign the devicename LPT1: to the LASER2 printer queue on the
       \\ACCOUNTING server, type

       net use lpt1: \\accounting\laser2


   c.  To cancel your connection to the \\ACCOUNTING\LASER2 printer queue
       connected to LPT1:, type

       net use lpt1: /delete


   d.  To establish access to the \\FINANCIAL server's SCRATCH shared
       directory, which requires the password meteor, type

       net use \\financial\scratch meteor


   e.  To cancel your connection to the \\FINANCIAL\SCRATCH shared directory,
       type

       net use \\financial\scratch /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Making connections                Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Restoring a set of connections    Net Load

 Pausing and continuing            Net Pause, Net Continue
 connections

 Saving connections                Net Save


 Net View
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net view command displays a list of servers or displays resources that a
 server is sharing.


 Syntax

 net view [\\computername]

 where

 \\computername
   Specifies the server whose shared resources you want to view.

 To display a list of servers in your workstation domain, logon domain, and
 other domains, type net view without options.


 Comments

 When you type net view without options, you see a list of servers similar to
 the following:

   Server Name           Remark
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   \\PRODUCTION          Production file server
   \\PRINT1              Printer room, first floor
   \\SALES               Sales records and lists

 When you specify a server with net view, you see a list of resources the
 server is sharing. The display looks similar to the following:

   Shared Resources at \\PRINT1
   Printer room, first floor

   Sharename      Type   Used as  Comment
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   PRT            Print  LPT2:    Printer pool
   FAST_PRT       Print  LPT1:    High priority printer
   D              Disk   R:       Drive D Root

 The columns give the following information:

 Sharename
   The name of the resource.

 Type
   The type of resource being shared.

 Used as
   The local devicename (if any) assigned to the resource.

 Comment
   An optional comment about the resource, supplied by an administrator.


 Examples


   a.  To see a list of servers in your domain, type

       net view


   b.  To see a list of the resources shared on the \\PRODUCTION server, type

       net view \\production



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Shared resources                  Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Using a resource shared on a      Net Use
 server


 Net Who
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net who command lists users logged on in a domain, at a server, or at a
 workstation. It also lists information about a user.


 Syntax

 net who [/domain:name | \\computername | username]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server whose users you want information about.

 username
   Is the name of the user you want information about.

 /domain:name
   Lists users on a domain other than the domain in which you're logged on.

 To display information about users in the logon domain, type net who without
 options.


 Comments

 When you type net who without options, you see a list of users logged on in
 your logon domain.The display looks similar to the following:

   Users on Domain HEADQTRS

                              Time since
   Username    Workstation         Logon    Full Name
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄ
   ABIGAIL     PRODUCTION       10:11:45    Abigail Martin
   ARNIEG      FINANCIAL        06:19:00    Arnold Gates
   PHILB       SALES            11:23:13    Phil Bates

 The "Workstation" column lists the computername of the user's workstation.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The net who command provides information about servers using LAN Manager
 version 2.0. Servers using previous versions of LAN Manager provide
 information about users connected to it only to users with administrative
 privileges on the server.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Example

 To see a list of users currently logged on in the marketing domain, type

   net who /domain:marketing

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Displaying a list of servers      Net View






 PART III  LAN Manager Basic
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Part 3 explains how to use a LAN Manager Basic workstation to perform
 network tasks. It includes procedures for starting the workstation, getting
 help, and using shared resources. Additionally, LAN Manager Basic commands
 are explained in detail.






 Chapter 8  Using LAN Manager Basic
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter explains how to start and use LAN Manager Basic, get online
 help, connect to local-area network directories and printers, and print jobs
 over the network. Instructions for viewing, pausing, and continuing your
 workstation's network connections are included. For information about LAN
 Manager Enhanced, see Part 2, "LAN Manager Enhanced."


 Starting LAN Manager Basic

 To use LAN Manager Basic, you must start the Workstation service, which
 loads software into your computer's memory that lets you connect to and use
 network resources. When you start the workstation, you supply a unique
 computername. This computername identifies your workstation to servers.


   ş   To start the workstation:



   1.  Get your computername from your administrator.

   2.  Type net start workstation followed by your computername.


     For example, if your computername is johnw, start the workstation by
     typing

   net start workstation johnw

     (Note that workstation can be abbreviated as wksta, redirector, or rdr.)


 Several messages appear as the workstation starts. When the workstation is
 started, you'll see this message:

   Command completed successfully.

 Once the workstation is started, it remains running until you turn off the
 computer.

 If you specify a computername that is already being used on the network, the
 following error message is displayed:

   System error.

 If you receive this message, the workstation is started, but it does not
 have a computername and you cannot use the workstation. See your
 administrator to get a valid computername. Then use the net name command to
 assign the computername.


   ş   To assign a computername when the workstation has been started but no
       computername has been assigned, type net name followed by a valid
       computername.

       For example, to assign the computername johnwa, type

       net name johnwa


 You can verify a workstation's computername after the workstation is started
 by typing net name. A display similar to the following appears:

   Name  Type
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   JOHNWA  COMPUTER NAME

 Once a valid computername is assigned, it cannot be changed. You must turn
 off the computer and restart the workstation to assign a different
 computername.


 Getting Help

 LAN Manager Basic gives you two kinds of help: a listing of all the commands
 for which help is available or information about a specific command.

 To see a list of LAN Manager Basic commands and an explanation of syntax,
 type net help.

 There are two ways to get help with a specific command:


   ş   By typing net help followed by the command name (without typing net as
       part of the command name)

   ş   By typing the full command name followed by help


 For example, you can type

   net help print

 or

   net print help

 Both commands display the same information.


 Using Shared Directories

 LAN Manager Basic lets you use a shared directory in much the same way you
 would use a directory or disk drive on your computer. The files and
 application programs on a shared directory can be used as though they were
 stored on your computer.

 LAN Manager Basic lets you gain access to shared directories in two ways.
 You can connect your workstation to a shared directory by assigning a
 devicename to it. This concept is illustrated in Figure 8.1. You can also
 specify the shared directory as part of a pathname in some MS-DOS commands.
 These procedures are explained in the following two sections.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 In both cases, the shared directory is identified by a network path. A
 network path is a server's computername followed by a sharename. A sharename
 is a name that identifies a shared resource (directory or printer queue).
 Two backslashes (\\) precede the computername, and another backslash
 precedes the sharename.

 For instance, \\PRODUCTION\REPORTS specifies a network path for the REPORTS
 shared directory on the \\PRODUCTION server.


 Connecting to a Shared Directory

 You can connect your workstation to a shared directory by assigning a disk
 drive devicename to it.

 A disk drive devicename is a drive letter followed by a colon (for example,
 D:). You use the devicename to gain access to the shared directory just as
 you use A: to gain access to a floppy disk drive on your computer.
 Devicenames A: through Z: are available.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If you assign a devicename of a disk drive on your computer (for example,
 A:), your workstation recognizes the network connectionÄnot the local
 driveÄunless the network connection is paused or disconnected. Avoid
 assigning the C: devicename.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


   ş   To connect to a shared directory, type net use followed by a disk
       drive devicename, a space, and the network path of the directory.

       For example, to assign the S: devicename to the MIDWEST shared
       directory on the \\SALES server, type

       net use s: \\sales\midwest


 If you make a mistake in typing a command or you specify an incorrect
 network path when connecting to a shared directory, the following error
 messages may appear:

   Connection refused or syntax error

   Network name not found

 Some resources require you to supply a password to make a connection. If you
 don't supply a password when one is required, the following error message
 appears:

   Access denied

 To learn how to supply passwords, see the "Using Passwords" section.

 Once a connection is established, you no longer need to specify the network
 path to gain access to the shared directory. Instead, specify the devicename
 you assigned to the directory.

 For instance, if S: is assigned to the \\SALES\MIDWEST directory, S:
 represents the network connection in the same way C: represents your
 computer's hard disk drive. You can change the current drive to S: and use
 the shared directory as though it were one of your computer's disk drives.

 Using Passwords - You may need to type a password with net use to gain
 access to a shared directory. Your administrator can give you the correct
 password.

 Once you know the correct password, there are two ways to supply it:


   ş   By typing the password at the end of the net use command.

       For example, to supply the password region while assigning S: to the
       MIDWEST shared directory on the \\SALES server, type


   net use s: \\sales\midwest region


   ş   By typing an asterisk (*) instead of the password at the end of the
       command line. LAN Manager Basic then prompts you for a password.

       To use this method with the preceding example, type


   net use s: \\sales\midwest *

     The following prompt appears:

   Password:

     Type the password at the prompt. The letters don't appear on the screen
     as you type, keeping the password confidential.


 Using MS-DOS Commands with Shared Directories

 The network path of a shared resource can be used as part of a pathname in
 some MS-DOS commands. In this case, LAN Manager Basic connects to the server
 sharing the directory when the command is performed, provided the directory
 doesn't require a password.

 You don't need to assign a devicename to a shared directory when the network
 path is used as part of an MS-DOS command. But if a devicename is assigned,
 you can specify the devicename rather than the network path in the command.


 You can also use a file in a shared directory with any application program
 that runs under MS-DOS. For example, to edit the LIST.DOC file in the
 \\SALES\MIDWEST directory with Microsoft Word, type

   word \\sales\midwest\list.doc

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If you want to use a shared directory in an MS-DOS command but the directory
 requires a password, you must type net use, the network path, and the
 password. You don't need to specify a devicename.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 You cannot use network paths with the following MS-DOS commands:


   ş   dir

   ş   copy


 The following commands, which read from and write to the disk, cannot be
 used with shared directories and their files:


   ş   chkdsk

   ş   diskcopy

   ş   format

   ş   join

   ş   recover

   ş   subst

   ş   sys


 If you try to use a command that reads to or writes from the disk with a
 shared directory, the following message appears:

   Cannot [command] a Network drive

 where [command] is the name of the command you typed.


 Disconnecting from a Shared Directory

 You can disconnect your workstation from a shared directory when you are
 finished using it or when you want to assign the devicename to another
 resource.


   ş   To disconnect your workstation from a shared directory, type net use
       followed by the devicename and /delete. (The /delete option can be
       abbreviated as /d.)


     For example, to disconnect D: from a shared directory, type

   net use d: /delete


 Using Shared Printers

 With LAN Manager Basic, you can use shared printers by connecting your
 workstation to a shared printer queue.

 A printer queue manages print jobs. It collects print jobs and sends them to
 a printer in the order they're received. Incoming jobs are held in the queue
 until the printer is ready to print them (see Figure 8.2).

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 When you connect your workstation to a shared printer queue, you send print
 jobs to the queue just as you would send print jobs to a printer attached to
 your computer.


 Connecting to a Shared Printer Queue

 Connect your workstation to a printer queue by assigning a devicename.
 Devicenames LPT1: through LPT3: are available.


   ş   To connect your workstation to a printer queue, type net use followed
       by the devicename and the network path of the printer queue.

       For example, to assign LPT1: to the PRINT1 printer queue on the
       \\FINANCIAL server, type

       net use lpt1: \\financial\print1


 If you use a devicename that is also attached to a printer at your
 workstation, your workstation will recognize only the network connection
 when you use the devicename. To get your workstation to recognize the
 printer that is attached to your computer, you must disconnect or pause the
 connection to the shared printer queue.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 You may need to supply a password with net use to gain access to a shared
 printer queue. See the "Using Passwords" section, earlier in this chapter.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Printing over the Network

 Once you have assigned a devicename to a shared printer queue, there are two
 ways to print a file over the network. You can print a file from an
 application program or send a file directly to the devicename.


   ş   To print a file from a software application, set up the application to
       print to the devicename you assigned to the shared printer queue. Then
       print as you normally would.

   ş   To send a file to a devicename assigned to a printer queue, type net
       print followed by the filename and then the devicename.

       For example, to send the STATUS.DOC file to the printer queue
       connected to LPT1:, type


   net print status.doc lpt1:


 Viewing the Status of a Print Job

 You can view the contents of a shared printer queue connected to a
 devicename, or you can view the contents of all queues on a server.


   ş   To view the contents of a shared printer queue connected to a
       devicename, type net print followed by the devicename.

       For example, to view the printer queue connected to LPT1:, type

       net print lpt1:

   ş   To view the contents of a server's printer queues, type net print
       followed by the computername of the server.

       For example, to view the contents of printer queues on the \\FINANCIAL
       server, type

       net print \\financial


 You don't need a connection to a server to view the contents of its queues.
 When you specify either a devicename or a computername, a display similar to
 the following appears:

   Pos   ID      Size      Date     Time   Name        Status
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   001   268   115074    05-10-90   16:20  ANDREWS   Printing
   002   269    65174    05-10-90   16:22  KATIEMC   Waiting
   003   270    34594    05-10-90   16:25  SETHJ     Waiting
   004   271   103465    05-10-90   16:28  CAROLR    Waiting

 For each print job, the position in the queue, identification number, size
 (in bytes), date, time, owner, and status are displayed.


 Disconnecting from a Shared Printer Queue

 You can disconnect your workstation from a shared printer queue when you are
 done using the resource or when you want to use the connection for another
 resource.


   ş   To disconnect from a shared printer queue, type net use followed by
       the devicename and /delete. (The /delete option can be abbreviated as
       /d.) For example:

       net use lpt1: /d




 Listing Connections to Network Resources

 At any time, you can view your connections to directories and printer
 queues.


   ş   To view the status of your workstation's connections or the names of
       devicenames and resources you're using, type net use.


     A display similar to the following appears:

   Local     Network
   Status    Device    Name
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
             D:        \\FINANCIAL\SYS
             E:        \\SALES\SUSANKO
             F:        \\FINANCIAL\APPS
   ERROR     LPT1:     \\FINANCIAL\LASERJET

     The listing shows all of the network resources connected to your
     workstation.

     If "ERROR" appears in the "Status" column, the connection is no longer
     active or has been suspended by the server. You may need to delete the
     connection and connect to the resource again.


 Pausing and Continuing Connections

 Occasionally, you may want to pause network connections to use devicenames
 for your workstation's own disk drives or printers.


   ş   To pause connections to all shared directories, type net pause drdr.
       To pause connections to all shared printer queues, type net pause
       prdr.

   ş   To continue connections to all shared directories, type net continue
       drdr. To continue connections to all shared printer queues, type net
       continue prdr.


 For example, if you've assigned your workstation's LPT1: devicename to a
 shared printer, you can't use LPT1: for a local printer. To pause this
 connection, type

   net pause prdr

 You can now use LPT1: for the printer attached to your computer. Note that
 pausing one printer connection pauses all printer connections.

 When you want to use the shared printer again, type

   net continue prdr

 Your connections to shared printer queues are reactivated.






 Chapter 9  Basic Command Reference
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter provides a reference page for each LAN Manager Basic command.
 The purpose and syntax for each command, as well as comments, examples, and
 cross-references, are provided on the command reference page. The command
 reference pages are arranged in alphabetical order.


 Command Summary

 The following LAN Manager Basic commands are described in this chapter:

 net continue
   Reactivates network connections suspended with the net pause command.

 net help
   Provides help with a specific command or lists commands for which help is
   available.

 net name
   Displays the computername assigned to a workstation or assigns a
   computername to a workstation.

 net pause
   Pauses connections to shared resources.

 net print
   Displays the contents of shared printer queues or prints a file.

 net start workstation
   Starts the workstation and sets the computername.

 net use
   Connects the workstation to or disconnects the workstation from shared
   resources, or displays a list of the workstation's network connections.





 Net Continue
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net continue command reactivates network connections suspended with the
 net pause command.


 Syntax

 net continue {drdr | prdr}

 where

 drdr
   Continues the workstation's connections to all shared directories.

 prdr
   Continues the workstation's connections to all shared printer queues.


 Comments

 The net continue command can be abbreviated as net cont.

 When you continue network connections, any local connections, such as a
 printer attached to port LPT1 on your workstation, are suspended.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Pausing and continuing network    Chapter 8, "Using LAN Manager Basic"
 connections

 Suspending connections to shared  Net Pause
 resources

 Connecting to a shared resource   Net Use


 Net Help
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net help command provides help with a specific command or lists commands
 for which help is available.


 Syntax

 net help [command]

 net [command] help

 where

 command
   Is the command you need help with. Command names are continue, name,
   pause, print, start, and use.

 To display information about how to get help, type net help.


 Comments

 For help with a specific command, type net, the command name, and help, or
 type net help followed by the command name (do not repeat the word net as
 part of the command name).


 Examples


   a.  To view a list of LAN Manager Basic commands that you can get help
       with, type

       net help


   b.  To get information about the net use command, type

       net help use


       or

       net use help


 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Getting help                      Chapter 8, "Using LAN Manager Basic"


 Net Name
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net name command displays the computername assigned to a workstation or
 assigns a computername to a workstation.


 Syntax

 net name [computername]

 where

 computername
   Is the name assigned to the workstation.

 To display the workstation's computername, type net name.


 Comments

 The computername identifies your workstation on the network. When you
 connect your workstation to a shared resource, the server sharing the
 resource checks the computername to verify that you are allowed access. A
 computername must be unique on the network.

 The computername is assigned with the net start workstation command unless
 you try to assign a name that is already being used on the network. In this
 case, the workstation will be started, but no computername will be assigned.
 If this occurs, use net name to assign a valid computername.

 If no computername is displayed when you type net name without options, the
 workstation was started without a valid computername.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Computernames                     Chapter 8, "Using LAN Manager Basic"

 Setting computernames             Net Start Workstation


 Net Pause
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net pause command pauses connections to shared resources.


 Syntax

 net pause {drdr | prdr}

 where

 drdr
   Pauses the workstation's connections to all shared directories.

 prdr
   Pauses the workstation's connections to all shared printer queues.


 Comments

 Pausing a connection allows you to use a devicename for a device at your
 workstation instead of a shared resource.

 For example, the LPT1: devicename can be connected to a shared printer
 queue. If LPT1: is also used for a printer attached to your computer, you
 can pause the network connection and print a file at your computer's
 printer. To send print jobs back to the shared printer queue, reactivate the
 connection with the net continue command.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Pausing and continuing network    Chapter 8, "Using LAN Manager Basic"
 connections

 Continuing connections to shared  Net Continue
 resources


 Net Print
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net print command displays the contents of shared printer queues or
 prints a file.


 Syntax

 net print {\\computername [\sharename] | devicename}

 net print [filename] devicename

 where

 \\computername
   Is the server sharing the printer queue(s).

 sharename
   Is the name of a printer queue.

 devicename
   Is the device at your workstation assigned to the printer queue. LPT1:
   through LPT3: are available.

 filename
   Is the name of the file to be printed.


 Comments

 Specifying the computername of a server displays the contents of its printer
 queues. You don't need to be connected to a server to view the contents of
 its printer queues.

 Specifying the devicename assigned to a printer queue displays the contents
 of that printer queue, allowing you to check the status of a print job after
 it's sent.

 Specifying either a computername or a devicename produces a display similar
 to the following:

   Pos   ID       Size      Date     Time   Name   Status
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   001   268    115074   05-10-90   16:20   DANC   Printing
   002   269     65174   05-10-90   16:22   JOHNSW Waiting

 This display shows the position, identification number, size (in bytes),
 date, time, owner, and status of each print job.

 The "Name" column lists the owner of the print job. If the job was sent from
 a LAN Manager Basic workstation, the computername is displayed. If the job
 was sent from a LAN Manager Enhanced or an MS OS/2 workstation, the user's
 username is displayed.


 Examples


   a.  To examine the contents of printer queues at the \\FINANCIAL server,
       type

       net print \\financial


   b.  To send the REPORTS.DOC file to the printer queue connected to your
       workstation's LPT1: devicename, type

       net print reports.doc lpt1:


   c.  To check the status of a print job that has been sent to the printer
       queue connected to LPT1:, type

       net print lpt1:



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Printing over the network         Chapter 8, "Using LAN Manager Basic"

 Connecting to shared printer      Net Use
 queues


 Net Start Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start workstation command starts the workstation and sets the
 computername.


 Syntax

 net start workstation computername

 where

 computername
   Is the name assigned to the workstation.


 Comments

 You can abbreviate workstation as wksta, redirector, or rdr.

 When you type net start workstation computername, LAN Manager Basic software
 is loaded into your computer's memory and the workstation is started.

 For convenience, the net start workstation command can be added to an
 AUTOEXEC.BAT file to start LAN Manager Basic automatically.

 Once started, the workstation remains running until the computer is turned
 off or restarted.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Computernames                     Chapter 8, "Using LAN Manager Basic"

 Checking the computername         Net Name


 Net Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net use command connects the workstation to or disconnects the
 workstation from shared resources, or displays a list of the workstation's
 network connections.


 Syntax

 net use

 net use [devicename] [\\computername\sharename [password | *]]

 net use {devicename | \\computername\sharename} /delete

 where

 devicename
   Assigns a name to a shared resource. There are two kinds of devicenames:
   disk drive devicenames (A: through Z:) and printer devicenames (LPT1:
   through LPT3:).

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server sharing the resource.

 sharename
   Is the name of the shared resource.

 password
   Is the password needed to use the shared resource.

 *
   Results in a prompt for the password.

 /delete
   Ends a network connection (/delete can be abbreviated as /d).

 To display a list of the workstation's connections, type net use.


 Comments

 Connecting to a shared resource lets you use the resource as if it were
 attached to your computer. If you assign a devicename of a disk drive on
 your computer (for example, A:), your workstation recognizes the network
 connectionÄnot the local driveÄunless the network connection is paused or
 disconnected.

 For example, net use can connect your workstation to a shared printer queue
 with a high-quality printer. When you use an application such as Microsoft
 Excel, you can print files on the printer by directing print jobs to the
 devicename assigned to the queue.

 If a password is required to gain access to a shared resource, LAN Manager
 Basic sends an error message if the password is not supplied. If this
 occurs, obtain the password from your administrator and retype the command.
 You can type an asterisk (*) instead of the password to get a password
 prompt. As you type the password, the letters are not displayed, keeping the
 password confidential.

 The net use  command can be added to the AUTOEXEC.BAT file to connect to
 shared resources automatically.

 You cannot delete a connection to a shared directory if it's used as your
 current drive. You must first change to another drive.

 When typed without options, net use lists all of your workstation's network
 connections. The display looks similar to the following:

   Local     Network
   Status    Device    Name
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
             M:        \\FINANCIAL\SCRATCH
   ERROR     LPT1:     \\SALES\LASER

 This display lists the status, local devicename, and network path of each
 connection.

 If "ERROR" appears in the "Status" column, the connection is no longer
 active or has been suspended by the server. You may need to delete the
 connection and connect to the resource again.


 Examples


   a.  To assign the E: devicename to the LETTERS shared directory on the
       \\SALES server, type

       net use e: \\sales\letters


   b.  To assign the LPT1: devicename to the LASER shared printer queue on
       the \\SALES server, type

       net use lpt1: \\sales\laser


   c.  To disconnect the LPT1: devicename, type

       net use lpt1: /delete


   d.  To establish access to the \\FINANCIAL server's SCRATCH shared
       directory, which requires the password deposits, type

       net use \\financial\scratch deposits



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Shared directories                Chapter 8, "Using LAN Manager Basic"






 Appendix A  Menu Commands
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This appendix gives a brief tour of the LAN Manager Screen. It describes
 information displayed on the screen and explains what you can do with each
 menu command.


 The LAN Manager Screen

 After you start the Workstation service, you can use the LAN Manager Screen.
 The screen is shown in Figure A.1.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The fields of the LAN Manager Screen provide the following information:

 Menu bar
   Displays the names of menus from which you can select menu commands.

 Current focus
   Shows the computername of your workstation or the server that is the focus
   of activity when using LAN Manager Screen commands.

 Workstation information
   Provides the following information about your workstation:

     Your username
       The username specified when you logged on to the network.

     Your computername
       The computername specified when the workstation was started.

     Your domain
       The name of your logon domain. This is the domain name specified when
       you logged on to the network. If you didn't specify a domain name, you
       automatically logged on in the workstation domain, which is specified
       in the LANMAN.INI file. Note that the workstation domain and the logon
       domain are the same.

 Servers in the logon and workstation domains
   Lists the servers in your logon and workstation domains.

 Scroll bar
   Lets you scroll through the servers in the list box with the mouse.

 Message line
   Provides a brief statement about the current menu, command, or task.


 View Menu

 The View menu commands let you view shared resources on the server of
 current focus, make connections to shared resources, view your workstation's
 connections, view information about users on the network, and exit the LAN
 Manager Screen.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the View menu commands:

 Available resources
   Displays the different types of resources available on the server of
   current focus. These resources include shared directories (disks) and
   printers.

 Printer queues
   Displays the printer queues on the server of current focus and the print
   jobs in each queue.

 Used resources
   Displays the resources that your workstation is connected to on the server
   of current focus. You can connect your workstation to resources shared by
   servers other than the server of current focus and by non-LAN Manager
   servers.

 Users on a server
   Displays the users that are logged on at the server of current focus.

 Users on a domain
   Displays the users that are logged on in a domain.

 Exit
   Removes the LAN Manager Screen.


 Message Menu

 The Message menu commands let you send, log, and read messages, and add and
 delete aliases.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the Message menu commands:

 Send a typed message
   Lets you send a message to one or more users on the network.

 Log messages to file
   Lets you select the log file that stores your messages, and pause and
   continue message logging.

 Read message log file
   Displays the messages in your message log file.

 Aliases
   Displays the message aliases on your workstation. You can add message
   aliases to and delete message aliases from your workstation.


 Config Menu

 The Config menu commands let you log on, log off, use profiles, and view
 your workstation configuration.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the Config menu commands:

 Log on to LAN

   Lets you log on to the network.

 Log off from LAN
   Lets you log off from the network.

 Load profile
   Displays the profiles that you can load to make automatic connections to
   shared resources.

 Save profile
   Lets you save a record of the workstation's current connections as a
   profile.

 Workstation options
   Displays information about your workstation's configuration.


 Accounts Menu

 The Accounts menu commands let you view information about your account and
 change your password.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the Accounts menu commands:

 Your account

   Displays information about your account.

 Change your password
   Lets you change your password at a server.


 Help Menu

 The Help menu commands let you access different types of online help.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the Help menu commands:

 General help F1

   Describes the LAN Manager Screen and how to use it.

 Keyboard
   Tells how to use the LAN Manager Screen with the keyboard.

 Mouse
   Tells how to use the LAN Manager Screen with the mouse.

 Table of contents
   Displays a list of tasks you can perform with the LAN Manager Screen.

 Glossary of terms
   Displays an alphabetical list of terms and definitions used with LAN
   Manager Enhanced.

 Using Help
   Explains how to use help.

 About LAN Manager
   Provides a brief description of LAN Manager.






 Appendix A  Country Codes
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 A country code in a user account defines the language in which messages are
 sent from a server to a user. Messages such as print notifications and
 alerts are sent from a server to a user's workstation. The country code does
 not affect the language of error messages and explanation messages generated
 by the workstation itself.

 The following table lists available country codes. The default value for the
 country code is 0. If the default value is specified, messages are sent in
 the language used in the LANMAN\NETPROG\NET.MSG file.

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Country    Code  Country         Code
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Asia       099   Latin America   003
 Australia  061   Netherlands     031
 Belgium    032   Norway          047
 Canada     002   Portugal        351
 Denmark    045   Spain           034
 Finland    358   Sweden          046
 France     033   Switzerland     041
 Germany    049   United Kingdom  044
 Italy      039   United States   001
 Japan      081
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ








 Glossary
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Account
 See User account

 Administrator
 The individual responsible for the local-area network. This person typically
 configures the network, maintains the network's shared resources and
 security system, creates user accounts, assigns permissions, and helps
 users.

 Alert message
 A message sent by a server to a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation informing
 the user of conditions that require attention.

 Alias
 A name used to receive messages at a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation. A
 workstation can have up to 15 aliases, including the computername and
 username. An alias must be unique on the local-area network.

 Application program
 A program used for a particular kind of work, such as word processing or
 database management.

 ASCII text
 A standard text file. See also Binary format.

 Basic
 See LAN Manager Basic.

 Batch file
 See Batch program.

 Batch program
 An executable program containing a group of commands that are performed
 whenever the batch program is run. MS-DOS batch programs always have the
 filename extension .BAT. A batch program called AUTOEXEC.BAT runs when you
 start MS-DOS.

 Binary format
 A series of binary digits (ones and zeros). See also ASCII text.

 Broadcast message
 A message sent to all users in a domain or on the local-area network. See
 also Messenger service.

 Buffer
 An area in a computer's memory that is used to store data.

 Check box
 An area in a LAN Manager Screen dialog box that has options you can set.

 Click
 To position the mouse pointer on a character, and press and release the left
 mouse button.

 Command
 An instruction that provides the necessary information for a computer or a
 program to perform a specific task. You type LAN Manager Basic commands at
 the operating system prompt. You type LAN Manager Enhanced commands at the
 operating system prompt or choose them from a menu on the LAN Manager
 Screen.

 Command button
 A word or phrase enclosed in angle brackets at the bottom of the LAN Manager
 Screen or a dialog box (for example, <Zoom>> ). Choosing a command button
 carries out a task or leads to another dialog box.

 Command line
 The MS-DOS prompt. See also Command and Prompt.

 Command option
 See Option.

 Computername
 The name of a workstation or a server on a local-area network. In a network
 path, a server's computername is preceded by two backslashes (for example,
 \\SALES). Computernames must be unique on the local-area network. For LAN
 Manager Basic, the computername is used to identify your workstation to
 servers.

 Configuration
 The way the workstation, server, or local-area network is set up, including
 both hardware and software.

 Connect
 To assign a name of a local device to a shared resource or to gain access to
 a shared resource with a LAN Manager command. See also Devicename and Shared
 resource.

 Connection
 The software link between a workstation and a shared resource. You make
 connections by assigning a local devicename on a workstation to a shared
 resource on a server. See also Session.

 Continue
 To restart a LAN Manager service that was paused. See also Pause.

 Country code
 A code that is included in a user's account and specifies the user's
 language. This code determines the language in which messages are sent from
 the server.

 Current focus
 The server or workstation that is the focus of activity when using the LAN
 Manager Screen.

 Cursor
 The lighted shape on the computer screen showing where the next character
 you type will appear. See also Pointer.

 Device
 A piece of hardware that is attached to a computer and performs a specific
 function. There are two types of devicesÄdisks and printers. See Device
 driver.

 Device driver
 Software that enables a computer to recognize and use a device.

 Devicename
 The name of a device on your computer or the name of a device assigned to
 connect to a shared resource. The devicename is the name by which LAN
 Manager and your computer identify a disk device and a printer device. Two
 types of devicenames are used for local-area network connections: disk
 devicenames (for example, E:), and printer devicenames (for example, LPT1:).
 See also Disk device and  Printer device.

 Dialog box
 A box that appears on the LAN Manager Screen when a menu command is chosen.
 Dialog boxes typically present a number of options from which you can
 choose. Sometimes choosing an option from one dialog box causes another
 dialog box to appear.

 Directory
 A table of contents for a disk. The directory listing includes filenames,
 file sizes, and the date when the file was created or last modified.

 Disk device
 A device that stores information. Disk devices are identified by their
 devicenames. See also Devicename.

 Disk directory
 See Directory.

 Disk drive devicename
 See Devicename and Disk device.

 Domain
 A group of devices, servers, and workstations grouped together to simplify
 network administration and security. Domains have names and every computer
 on the local-area network belongs to at least one domain. Being logged on in
 one domain does not limit access to resources in other domains to which you
 have access. See also Logon domain, Other domains, and Workstation domain.

 Domain controller
 The server that verifies a user is allowed to log on in a domain. This
 server maintains a master record of user accounts.

 Double-click
 To position the mouse pointer on a character, and press and release the left
 mouse button twice with a quick motion.

 Drag
 To position the mouse pointer on the character that will begin or end your
 selection; press and hold down the left mouse button while moving your
 pointer to the other end of the desired selection; and release the left
 mouse button.

 Enhanced
 See LAN Manager Enhanced.

 Error log
 A file that stores LAN Manager error messages received by a LAN Manager
 Enhanced workstation.

 Error message
 A message that appears on your computer screen after LAN Manager or MS-DOS
 detects a problem while trying to process an operation or a command.

 Field
 One of the five areas within a dialog box. See also Check box, Command
 button, Dialog box, List box, Option button, and Text box.

 File attribute
 MS-DOS file attributes are read-only and archive. These attributes can be
 assigned to MS-DOS files and directories using the MS-DOS attrib command.

 Filename
 A unique name for a file. It can be from one to eight characters in length
 and can be followed by a filename extension consisting of a period (.) and
 one to three characters. See also Filename extension.

 Filename extension
 A period (.) and one to three characters that can be appended to a filename.
 For example, LAN Manager Enhanced profile files have the extension .PRO. See
 also Filename.

 Forwarding messages
 See Message forwarding.

 Home directory
 A directory on a server that an administrator sets aside for your personal
 use.

 Initialization file
 The LANMAN.INI file. This file is used by the LAN Manager software to
 determine the default settings for the workstation. See also LANMAN.INI.

 LAN
 See Local-area network.

 LAN Manager
 A software program that expands the features of MS-DOS to enable your
 computer to join a local-area network. See also Local-area network.

 LAN Manager Basic
 A version of LAN Manager that enables an MS-DOS computer to connect to
 local-area network directories and printers, and print jobs over the
 network. Using LAN Manager Basic, network tasks can be done from the command
 line only.

 LAN Manager Enhanced
 A version of LAN Manager that enables an MS-DOS computer to connect to
 local-area network directories and printers, print jobs over the network,
 send and receive network messages, and use profiles to automatically connect
 to network resources. Using LAN Manager Enhanced, network tasks can be done
 from the command line and from the LAN Manager Screen.

 LAN Manager Screen
 A menu-oriented, full-screen interface for LAN Manager Enhanced. With the
 LAN Manager Screen, you can use LAN Manager Enhanced without having to
 memorize command syntax.

 LANMAN.INI
 An initialization file that determines default settings for computers on the
 local-area network.

 List box
 An area in a LAN Manager Screen dialog box containing a list of items from
 which you can select. See also Scroll, Scroll bar, and Scroll box.

 Local
 Refers to a resource attached to a user's computer. See also Remote.

 Local resource
 See Local.

 Local-area network
 A group of personal computers and other hardware, attached by cable, that
 lets users share information and equipment.

 Log
 A file containing a historical list of information. See also Error log and
 Message log.

 Log off
 To remove your username and password from a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation
 and cancel connections to resources, but not stop LAN Manager Enhanced
 services.

 Log on
 To supply your username and password, which identify you as a user at a LAN
 Manager Enhanced workstation and as a member in a domain. See also Domain,
 Password, and Username.

 Logon domain
 A domain (other than the workstation domain) that is specified when you log
 on with LAN Manager Enhanced. See also Domain, Other domains, and
 Workstation domain.

 Logon password
 The password specified when logging on at a LAN Manager Enhanced
 workstation. See also Password.

 Menu
 A box that appears when you select a name from the menu bar on the LAN
 Manager Screen. A menu lists several commands from which you can choose.

 Menu bar
 The horizontal bar at the top of the LAN Manager Screen that lists the names
 of menus from which you choose commands.

 Menu command
 A command that can be chosen from a menu on the LAN Manager Screen. See also
 LAN Manager Screen, Menu, and Menu bar.

 Message alias
 See Alias.

 Message box
 A box that displays messages received at a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation
 when the Messenger and Netpopup services are running. See also Messenger
 service and Netpopup service.

 Message forwarding
 To use aliases to reroute messages from a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation
 to another workstation. See also Alias.

 Message line
 A message line displayed at the bottom of the LAN Manager Screen that
 provides information about the current menu, command, dialog box, or task.
 See also LAN Manager Screen.

 Message log
 A LAN Manager Enhanced file that can be used to store a workstation's
 messages as they are received.

 Message logging
 To save a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation's messages in a file. See also
 Error log and Message log.

 Messenger service
 A LAN Manager Enhanced service that enables a workstation to receive
 messages from other network users. This service also provides the ability to
 store messages in a message log file. See also Netpopup service.

 MS-DOS
 Microsoft Disk Operating System. This is the operating system on which LAN
 Manager Basic and Enhanced run.

 MS-DOS prompt
 See Prompt.

 Netpopup service
 A LAN Manager Enhanced service that displays messages on your computer
 screen as they arrive from other local-area network users or from LAN
 Manager. The Netpopup service requires that the Messenger service be
 running. See also Messenger service.

 Network path
 The computername of a server followed by the sharename of a shared resource.
 A server's computername is preceded by two backslashes (\\), and a sharename
 is preceded by one backslash (for example, \\SALES\REPORTS). You connect
 your workstation to a shared resource by specifying a network path. See also
 Computername, Resource, and Sharename.

 Network resource
 A resource that is available to local-area network users. See also Resource
 and Shared resource.

 Option
 Part of a command that determines how the command or service works, but
 which is not required.

 Option button
 A button in a LAN Manager Screen dialog box from which you can select one
 option from a group of options.

 Other domains
 Domains other than the logon and workstation domains in which your LAN
 Manager Enhanced workstation is a member. See also Domain, Logon domain, and
 Workstation domain.

 Password
 A word that a LAN Manager Enhanced user supplies when logging on at a
 workstation (the logon password) or connecting to a shared resource. The
 password, together with the username, establishes the user's identity on the
 local-area network. See also Logon password.

 Path
 The name of one or more directories (for example, REPORTS\ACCT\NORTH). See
 also Pathname.

 Pathname
 The name of one or more directories followed by a filename. For example, the
 pathname of the MONTHLY.RPT file in the REPORTS\ACCT\NORTH directory is
 REPORTS\ACCT\NORTH\MONTHLY.RPT.

 Pause
 To suspend a LAN Manager service. See also Continue.

 Permission
 A setting on a shared resource that determines which users can use the
 resource and how.

 Pointer
 A small graphic symbol that shows mouse users their location on the screen.
 The mouse pointer on the LAN Manager Screen is a small rectangular box.

 Pool
 A group of similar devices that receive requests from the same queue.

 Port
 A socket in the back of a hardware device (for example, a computer or
 printer) where a cable is plugged in.

 Print job
 A file sent to a printer queue to be printed.

 Printer device
 A device that prints information. Printer devices are identified by their
 devicenames. See also Devicename.

 Printer queue
 A queue that manages and routes print jobs.

 Privilege
 A privilege level is assigned for each user account. The privilege level
 defines the range of action a user can have on the local-area network.

 Profile
 A file containing LAN Manager Enhanced commands that automatically connect a
 LAN Manager Enhanced workstation to a group of shared resources.

 Prompt
 The symbol that tells you an operating system or program is ready to receive
 a command. You type commands at the prompt.

 Remote
 Refers to a server, workstation, or resource that is not located where you
 are currently working. See also Local.

 Resource
 Something that is shared over the local-area network. This includes, but is
 not limited to, disk drives, directories, and printers. See also Shared
 resource.

 Scroll
 To move data or text up and down, or left and right, in a LAN Manager Screen
 dialog box.

 Scroll bar
 The shaded bar that appears at the right of some LAN Manager Screen list
 boxes. Use the scroll bar and the mouse to scroll through a list box that
 contains more information than can be shown in one screen.

 Scroll box
 The small box superimposed on the scroll bar that appears at the right of
 some LAN Manager Screen list boxes. The scroll box reflects the position of
 the information within the window in relation to the total contents of the
 list. See also Scroll bar.

 Server
 A computer on a local-area network that controls access to resources such as
 files and printers. A server can also be used as a workstation.

 Service
 A program that is one of the main components of LAN Manager.

 Session
 A link between a workstation and a server. A session consists of one or more
 connections to shared resources. See also Connection.

 Setup program
 A program that installs LAN Manager Enhanced or Basic software on a
 workstation.

 Shared directory
 A disk directory on a server to which users of the local-area network have
 access. A shared directory contains files that are available to network
 users.

 Shared printer
 See Printer queue.

 Shared printer queue
 See Printer queue.

 Shared resource
 A resource available to users of the local-area network. See also Resource.

 Sharename
 A name that identifies a shared resource. See also Computername and Shared
 resource.

 Sharing
 The process by which resources are made available to local-area network
 users.

 Software
 The programs, routines, or instructions written in a computer language that
 instruct the computer to perform one or more tasks.

 Text box
 An area in a LAN Manager Screen dialog box where you type information. The
 text box may or may not contain text.

 Title bar
 The place at the top of a LAN Manager Screen dialog box where titles appear.


 User
 Someone who uses the local-area network.

 User account
 A user's record on a server or in a domain that defines the hours during
 which the user can log on and controls the access that the user can have to
 resources in the domain.

 Username
 The name a LAN Manager Enhanced user types when logging on to the local-area
 network. This is the name by which the user is identified on the network.

 Wildcard character
 A character, used with MS-DOS directory commands, indicating that any
 character can occupy the position of the wildcard character. The wildcard
 characters are the asterisk (*) and the question mark (?).

 Workstation
 A computer with hardware and software that enable it to run LAN Manager.

 Workstation domain
 The domain into which a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation is logged by
 default. Unless another domain is specified during logon, LAN Manager
 Enhanced uses the workstation domain. See also Domain, Logon domain, and
 Other domains.

 Workstation service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a computer to use network resources and
 services. This service must be running for any other service to run.





 INDEX
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




     A
 Accounts menu
   Change your password command
   Your account command
 Accounts, user
   changing a password
   viewing your account
 Aliases
   adding and deleting
   forwarding
   viewing

     B
 Batch programs
   using commands in

     C
 Clocks, computer
   synchronizing
 Commands {B}
   viewing a list of
 Commands, net
   net access
   net config workstation
   net continue {B}
   net continue
   net copy
   net help {B}
   net help
   net helpmsg
   net load
   net log
   net logoff
   net logon
   net move
   net name {B}
   net name
   net password
   net pause {B}
   net pause
   net print {B}
   net print
   net save
   net send
   net start messenger
   net start netpopup
   net start workstation {B}
   net start workstation
   net stop
   net time
   net use {B}
   net use
   net view
   net who
   working with commands
     abbreviating
     commands summary {B}
     commands summary
     expediting a command
     password requirements
     use in batch programs
 Computername {B}
   assigning
   setting the computername at startup
   viewing
 Config menu
   Load profile command
   Log off from LAN command
   Save profile command
   Workstation options command
 Configuration, workstation
 Connecting
    see Directories, shared. Printer queues.
 Connections {B}
   continuing
   pausing
   viewing
 Connections
   saving
   viewing
 Continuing a service
    see Messenger service. Netpopup service. Workstation service.
 Controlling a service
    see Messenger service. Netpopup service. Workstation service.
 Copying files
    see Files
 Country codes
 Current focus

     D
 Deleting
    see Aliases
 Devicenames
   for disk resources
     assigning
     viewing
   for printer queues
 Directories, shared {B}, using
 Directories, shared
   changing permissions for
   connecting to
   defined
   disconnecting from
   making a onetime connection
   using
   viewing connections
 Disconnecting from printer queue
    see Printer queues
 Disconnecting
    see Directories, shared. Printer queues.
 Disks, shared
    see Directories, shared
 Display
    see LAN Manager Screen
 Domains
   belonging to
   changing your password for a domain
   defined
   logon domain
   sending messages to domains
   synchronizing clocks in
   viewing servers in
   workstation domain

     E
 Error messages, getting help with
 Exiting LAN Manager Screen
    see LAN Manager Screen

     F
 Files, shared
    see also Directories, shared
   changing permissions for
   copying
   moving
   using
 Files
   copying over the network
   moving over the network
 Finding users on network
    see Users, viewing

     H
 Help system {B}
 Help system
   displaying a Help message box
   F1 key
   for error messages
   for net commands
 Home directory, defined

     L
 LAN Manager Screen
   closing dialog boxes
   controlling the display
   exiting
   starting LAN Manager using
 LAN Manager services
    see Messenger service. Netpopup service. Workstation service.
 LAN Manager
   quitting
   starting automatically
   starting
 Language of messages
   assigning
 LANMAN.INI file, defined
 Log
    see Message log
 Logging messages
    see Message log
 Logging off
 Logging on
 Logon domain
    see Domains

     M
 Message log
   changing the log file
   controlling message logging
   Controlling message logging
   default
   LANMAN\LOGS directory
   MESSAGES.LOG file
   reading the log
   saving the log file
   turning off message logging
 Message menu
   Aliases command
     deleting an alias
   Log messages to file command
     changing the log file
   Read message log file command
   Send a typed message command
 Messages
   LAN Manager
     assigning a language for a user
   Netpopup service
     closing a message box
   printing
   reading
     message log
     with Netpopup running
   receiving
     for several users
   sending
     broadcasting
     to a workstation
 Messenger service
   defined
   starting
 Moving files
    see Files

     N
 Net access
 Net config workstation
 Net continue {B}
 Net continue
 Net copy
 Net help {B}
 Net help
 Net helpmsg
 Net load
 Net log
 Net logoff
 Net logon
   starting the workstation
 Net move
 Net name {B}
 Net name
 Net password
 Net pause {B}
 Net pause
 Net print {B}
 Net print
 Net save
 Net send
 Net start messenger
 Net start netpopup
 Net start workstation {B}
 Net start workstation
 Net stop
 Net time
 Net use {B}
 Net use
 Net view
 Net who
 Net
 Netpopup service
   and message logging
   closing a message box
   starting
 Network products, working with others
 Non-LAN Manager servers, connecting to

     P
 Passwords {B}, using with net commands
 Passwords
   changing your password
   logging on with
   using with net commands
 Pausing a service
    see Messenger service. Netpopup service. Workstation service.
 Permissions
   changing
   defined
 Print jobs
   defined
   deleting
   finding job numbers
   holding and releasing
   restarting
   viewing
 Printer queues {B}
   connecting to
   disconnecting from
   viewing status
 Printer queues
   connecting to
   controlling queued jobs
   defined
   disconnecting from
   making a onetime connection
   printing, using the LAN Manager Screen
   viewing
     queue information
     server's
     status
   with several printers
 Printers, shared {B}
 Printers, shared
    see also Printer queues.
   defined
 Profiles
   creating
   defined
   loading
   modifying

     Q
 Quitting LAN Manager
    see LAN Manager

     R
 Reading messages
    see Netpopup service. Messages. Message log.
 Resources, shared
   defined
   viewing

     S
 Saving connections
    see Connections. Profiles.
 Servers
   viewing shared resources of
   viewing
 Services
    see also Messenger service. Netpopup service. Workstation service.
   adjusting
   continuing
   controlling
   defined
   pausing
   stopping
 Shared
    see Directories, shared. Printers, shared.
 Starting Workstation service
    see Workstation service.
 Stopping services
    see Messenger service. Netpopup service. Workstation service.

     T
 Time, synchronizing the workstation's clock

     U
 Users
   viewing
     with the net who command

     V
 View menu
   Available resources command
     connecting to a printer queue
     connecting to a shared directory
     viewing resources
     viewing shared directories
   Printer queues command
     deleting a print job
     viewing printer queues
   Used resources command
     connecting to a printer queue
     connecting to a shared directory
     disconnecting from a printer queue
     disconnecting from a shared directory
     viewing printer queue connections
     viewing resource connections
   Users on a server command
     viewing users with connections to a server
 Viewing
    see Connections. Domains. Print jobs. Printer queues. Resources, shared. S

     W
 Workstation domain
    see Domains
 Workstation service
   adjusting performance
   adjusting the display
   Messenger service
   Netpopup service
   pausing
     effect on other services
   starting with a batch program
   starting
   stopping
   viewing configuration
 Workstation {B}
   starting
   viewing connections
 Workstation
   viewing configuration

