 Microsoft LAN Manager - Installation Guide








 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                Microsoft(R) LAN Manager - Installation Guide

                                 VERSION 2.0
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


                            Microsoft Corporation







 Information in this document is subject to change without notice and does
 not represent a commitment on the part of Microsoft Corporation. The
 software described in this document is furnished under a license agreement
 or nondisclosure agreement. The software may be used or copied only in
 accordance with the terms of the agreement. It is against the law to copy
 the software on any medium except as specifically allowed in the license or
 nondisclosure agreement. No part of this manual may be reproduced or
 transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
 photocopying and recording, for any purpose without the express written
 permission of Microsoft Corporation.  The LAN Manager Remoteboot service
 does not in any way amend nor supersede the provisions of the end user
 license agreements for MS-DOS or MS OS/2 ("Microsoft Software"). Those end
 user license agreements limit the use of a given copy of Microsoft Software
 to a single terminal connected to a single computer. They also prohibit the
 use of such Microsoft Software on a network or otherwise on more than one
 computer or computer terminal at the same time. Accordingly, Microsoft
 Software may not be remotely loaded to terminals or workstations unless you
 have a valid Microsoft end user license for each such remoteboot
 workstation.  U.S. Government Restricted Rights  The SOFTWARE and
 Documentation are provided with RESTRICTED RIGHTS. Use, duplication, or
 disclosure by the Government is subject to restrictions as set forth in
 subparagraph (c) (1) (ii) of The Rights in Technical Data and Computer
 Software clause at 252.227-7013 or paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of Commercial
 Computer DocumentationÄRestricted Rights at 48 CFR 52.227-19, as applicable.
 Contractor/Manufacturer is Microsoft Corporation/One Microsoft Way/Redmond,
 Washington 98052-6399.  (C)1990 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.
 Printed in the USA.  Microsoft, MS, MS-DOS, XENIX, and the Microsoft logo
 are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. Windows is a trademark
 of Microsoft Corporation.


 Intel is a registered trademark of Intel Corporation.
 386 is a trademark of Intel Corporation.

 IBM and PS/2 are registered trademarks of International
 Business Machines Corporation. Micro Channel is a trademark of International

 Business Machines Corporation.

 Lotus is a registered trademark of Lotus Development
 Corporation.

 Novell is a registered trademark of Novell, Inc.

 Document Number: SY14406-0590
  OEM-P787-2Z






 Table of Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Before You Begin
      How To Use This Manual
      Notational Conventions
      Finding Further Information

 Chapter 1  Overview

      System Requirements
      About Setup
      Starting Setup
      Using Setup
             Using the Keyboard
             Using the Mouse
      Online Help
      Backing Up System Files
      Tuning Server Performance
      Exiting Setup

 Chapter 2  Installing a Server

      Installing LAN Manager Software
      Importing Additional Network Device Drivers
      Defining Primary Parameters
             Primary Parameters Dialog Box
             Network Drivers Dialog Box
             Server Primary Parameters Dialog Box
             Workstation Primary Parameters Dialog Box
      Completing the Installation

 Chapter 3  Installing an MS OS/2 Workstation

      Installing LAN Manager Software
      Peer Service Installation Dialog Box
      Importing Additional Network Device Drivers
      Defining Primary Parameters
             Primary Parameters Dialog Box
             Network Drivers Dialog Box
             Server Primary Parameters Dialog Box
             Workstation Primary Parameters Dialog Box
      Completing the Installation

 Chapter 4  Installing LAN Manager Enhanced on an MS-DOS Workstation

      Installing LAN Manager Enhanced Software
      Importing Additional Network Device Drivers
      Defining Primary Parameters
             Primary Parameters Dialog Box
             Network Drivers Dialog Box
             Workstation Primary Parameters Dialog Box
             Windows Selection Dialog Box
             Memory Managers Dialog Box
      Completing the Installation

 Chapter 5  Installing LAN Manager Basic on an MS-DOS Workstation

      Installing LAN Manager Basic Software
      Importing Additional Network Device Drivers
      Defining Primary Parameters
             Primary Parameters Dialog Box
             Network Drivers Dialog Box
             Memory Managers Dialog Box
      Completing the Installation

 Chapter 6  Managing the Configuration

      Actions Menu
             Viewing or Changing Primary Parameters
             Importing Additional Network Device Drivers
      The Options Menu
             Viewing or Changing Server Parameters
             Viewing or Changing Workstation Parameters
             Viewing or Changing Service Parameters
      Completing the Configuration

 Chapter 7  Removing an Installation

      Saving Files
      Removing LAN Manager
      Detaching LAN Manager
      Attaching LAN Manager
      Removing HPFS386
             Removing HPFS386 File Permissions
             Removing the HPFS386 File System Driver

 Chapter 8  Upgrading from an Earlier LAN Manager Version

      Saving Files
      Removing LAN Manager 1.x
      Upgrading to a New Operating System Version
      Installing LAN Manager 2.0
      Restoring Files
      Converting the User Accounts Database

 Appendix A  Setting Up the Fault-Tolerance System

      Starting Ftsetup
      Drive Mirroring
      Managing Mirrored Drives
             Viewing Partitions
             Canceling Mirroring
             Deleting Partitions
             Exposing Orphaned Mirrors
             Removing the Fault-Tolerance System

 Appendix B  The LIM 4.0 Expanded Memory Manager


 Appendix C  Setting Up the Remoteboot Service

      Memory Requirements
      How the Remoteboot Service Works
      Preparing a Server
             Installing LAN Manager with Remoteboot Options
             Editing the CONFIG.SYS File
             Installing Operating System Files
             Setting Up the LANMAN\RPL and LANMAN\RPLUSER Directories
             Creating an MS-DOS Boot Image File
             Sharing Remoteboot Resources
             Viewing Records in the RPL.MAP File
      Using a Remoteboot Workstation
             Starting the Remoteboot Service
      Preparing a Workstation
             Creating Remoteboot Directories
             Adjusting User-Level Security
             Adding a Workstation Record
             Adding a .FIT File for the Workstation
             Adjusting Configuration Files for an MS OS/2 Workstation
             Enabling the Remoteboot Process on a Workstation's Hard Disk
             Disabling the Remoteboot Process on a Workstation's Hard Disk
      Troubleshooting the Remoteboot Service

 Appendix D  Setting Up an Uninterruptible Power Supply

      Attaching the Battery to a Server
      Installing the UPS Device Driver

 Appendix E  Setup Menus and Menu Commands

      Actions Menu
      Options Menu
      Exit Menu

 Appendix F  Booting an HPFS386 Server from a Floppy Disk


 Glossary


 Index



 Before You Begin
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The Microsoft(R) LAN Manager Installation Guide is for all users of
 Microsoft LAN Manager, though it is intended primarily for administrators.
 Anyone who installs or modifies the configuration of LAN Manager software
 should read this manual. It describes how to install LAN Manager software
 and use the LAN Manager Setup program to set options.

 Administrators are advised to study the network planning and security
 information in the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide before
 beginning installations. Users are advised to consult with their
 administrator before beginning an installation.

 This manual assumes that you know how to use Microsoft Operating System/2
 (MS(R) OS/2). If you are not familiar with MS OS/2, see your MS OS/2
 manual(s).

 For an explanation of terms and concepts specific to LAN Manager, read
 Getting To Know Microsoft LAN Manager and the Microsoft LAN Manager User's
 Guide.


 How To Use This Manual

 This manual contains the following chapters and appendixes:

 Chapter 1, "Overview"
   Provides system requirements and tells how to use the Setup program.

 Chapter 2, "Installing a Server"
   Includes step-by-step instructions for installing a server running MS OS/2
   version 1.2 or IBM(R) OS/2 Standard Edition version 1.2 corrective service
   diskette (CSD) XR04053.

 Chapter 3, "Installing an MS OS/2 Workstation"
   Describes the procedure for installing a workstation running MS OS/2
   version 1.1 or 1.2.

 Chapter 4, "Installing LAN Manager Enhanced on an MS-DOS Workstation"
   Contains instructions for installing a LAN Manager Enhanced workstation
   running MS-DOS(R) version 3.x or 4.01.

 Chapter 5, "Installing LAN Manager Basic on an MS-DOS Workstation"
   Includes instructions for installing a LAN Manager Basic workstation
   running MS-DOS version 3.x or 4.01.

 Chapter 6, "Managing the Configuration"
   Contains information about viewing and changing an existing installation.

 Chapter 7, "Removing an Installation"
   Provides steps for temporarily or permanently removing LAN Manager from a
   computer.

 Chapter 8, "Upgrading from an Earlier LAN Manager Version"
   Includes instructions for installing LAN Manager on a computer with a
   previous LAN Manager version (1.x).

 Appendix A, "Setting Up the Fault-Tolerance System"
   Provides information about protecting the computer's data from hardware
   failures.

 Appendix B, "The LIM 4.0 Expanded Memory Manager"
   Describes the EMM386.DOS device driver, which makes system memory beyond
   640 kilobytes available on an MS-DOS computer.

 Appendix C, "Setting Up the Remoteboot Service"
   Contains instructions for setting up the LAN Manager service that starts
   workstations remotely.

 Appendix D, "Setting Up an Uninterruptible Power Supply"
   Describes the device driver options and cable specifications for a
   server's uninterruptible power supply (an optional LAN Manager service).

 Appendix E, "Setup Menus and Menu Commands"
   Contains illustrations and brief descriptions of each menu and menu
   command in the Setup program.

 Appendix F, "Booting an HPFS386 Server from a Floppy Disk"
   Explains how to use a floppy disk to restart a server with the LAN Manager
   version of the MS OS/2 high-performance file system.

 This manual also has a glossary and an index.


 Notational Conventions

 This manual uses different type styles and special characters for different
 purposes:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Bold                              Represents commands, command options, and
                                   file entries. Type the words exactly as
                                   they appear, for example, net use.

 Italic                            Introduces new terms and represents
                                   variables. For example, the variable
                                   computername indicates that you supply the
                                   name of a workstation or server.

 Monospace                         Represents examples, screen displays,
                                   program code, and error messages.
 Convention                        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  program code, and error messages.

 FULL CAPS                         Represent filenames and pathnames in text.
                                   You can, however, type entries in
                                   uppercase or lowercase letters.

 SMALL CAPS                        Represent key names (such as CTRL or F2).

 KEY+KEY                           Indicates that you must press two keys at
                                   the same time. For example, "Press CTRL+Z"
                                   means to hold down CTRL and press Z.

 <Command>                         Indicates a command button to be chosen
                                   within a dialog box.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Finding Further Information

 In addition to this manual, the LAN Manager manual set includes the
 following:

 Getting To Know Microsoft LAN Manager
   Gives first-time network users an introduction to local-area networks and
   to LAN Manager.

 Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide for MS OS/2
   Provides guide and reference information about using LAN Manager on MS
   OS/2 workstations.

 Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide for MS-DOS
   Provides guide and reference information about using LAN Manager Enhanced
   and Basic on MS-DOS workstations.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide
   Provides detailed information about administering the LAN Manager network.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference
   Provides reference information about LAN Manager commands and utilities
   for MS OS/2 computers, and about the LAN Manager program directory and
   initialization file.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide
   Provides information about network device drivers that can be used with
   LAN Manager.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Programmer's Reference
   Provides information about LAN Manager application program interfaces
   (APIs). (This manual is optionally available.)

 Quick references are also available for users and administrators.






 Chapter 1  Overview
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This manual explains how to install Microsoft LAN Manager 2.0. Though
 primarily written for the network administrator, anyone who installs or
 modifies the configuration of LAN Manager software should read this manual.


 If you want to install as quickly as possible, without adjusting LAN Manager
 settings, read this chapter, then use the Microsoft LAN Manager Quick
 Reference for Installation.

 Before you begin, have the following information available:


   ş   Manuals for the computer.

   ş   Manuals for the operating system.

   ş   The manufacturer's name and model name of the network adapter card
       (the hardware in the computer that connects to the local-area
       network).

   ş   The name of the protocol(s) that you will be using (the software that
       LAN Manager uses to communicate with the local-area network).

   ş   The name of the computer's domain (a number of computers grouped for
       administrative and security purposes); if this computer is a server in
       a new domain, choose a new domain name.

   ş   The amount of random access memory (RAM) in the computer. (For MS-DOS,
       the Setup program detects the amount, but you may want to confirm it.)


 If you have not already installed the network hardware and operating system
 software, you must do so before installing the LAN Manager software.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If a computer is not actually connected to a local-area network, it is
 possible to install LAN Manager software without a network adapter card and
 emulate network operation. In this case, install LAN Manager using the local
 loopback driver, LOOPDRV.OS2. The loopback driver lets a computer with no
 network adapter card run LAN Manager for testing purposes. For more
 information about LOOPDRV.OS2, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device
 Driver Guide.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 System Requirements

 System requirements for LAN Manager depend on whether you are installing the
 software for a server, an MS OS/2 workstation (with or without the Peer
 service), an Enhanced workstation for MS-DOS, or a Basic workstation for
 MS-DOS. The Peer service allows an MS OS/2 workstation to share some of its
 resources with other computers.

 A server requires MS OS/2 version 1.2 or IBM OS/2 Standard Edition version
 1.2 corrective service diskette (CSD) XR04053. When installed on IBM OS/2
 1.2, LAN Manager may replace the OS/2 print spooler with the MS OS/2 1.2
 print spooler. The print spooler is software that manages print requests.
 For more information about the print spooler, see the Microsoft LAN Manager
 Administrator's Guide.

 The main differences between an Enhanced workstation for MS-DOS and a Basic
 workstation for MS-DOS are that the Basic workstation uses less memory, has
 a limited set of commands, does not use named pipes, and does not have the
 LAN Manager Screen. Named pipes are an interprocess communication (IPC)
 method for remote program execution (like the LAN Manager net run command)
 and other distributed applications (programs that coordinate activity
 between two or more computers, like Microsoft SQL Server). For more
 information about IPC resources, see the Microsoft LAN Manager
 Administrator's Guide.

 Table 1.1 shows hardware and operating system requirements for each
 configuration.

 Table 1.1 System Requirements

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚ
                                                                            Fr
 Config-     Hardware                   Operating                           Di
 uration                                System                              Sp
                                                                            Fr
 Config-     Hardware                   Operating                           Di
 uration                                System                              Sp
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
             8086/88   286  386(tm)     MS-DOS 3.x  MS OS/2     MS OS/2
                                        or 4.01     1.1         1.2

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 MS OS/2     N         Y    Y           N           N           Y           6
 server

 MS OS/2     N         Y    Y           N           N           Y           5
 workstatio
 n w/ Peer
 service

 MS OS/2     N         Y    Y           N           Y           Y           5
 workstatio
 n

                                                                            Fr
 Config-     Hardware                   Operating                           Di
 uration                                System                              Sp

 Enhanced    Y         Y    Y           Y           N           N           4
 workstatio
 n for
 MS-DOS

 Basic       Y         Y    Y           Y           N           N           1
 workstatio
 n for
 MS-DOS

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Table 1.2 shows the required system memory and the recommended system memory
 for each configuration.

 Table 1.2 System Memory Requirements

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Configuration              Required Memory  Recommended Memory
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 MS OS/2 server (386)       6 MB             9 MB

 MS OS/2 server (286)       5 MB             8 MB

 MS OS/2 1.2 workstation    3.5 MB           5 MB
 w/ Peer service

 MS OS/2 1.2 workstation    3 MB             4.5 MB

 MS OS/2 1.1 workstation    3 MB             4 MB

 Enhanced workstation for   512K             640K plus extended or
 MS-DOS                     (uses 25K-50K)   expanded memory

 Basic workstation for      512K             640K
 MS-DOS                     (uses 848
 Configuration              Required Memory  Recommended Memory
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
MS-DOS                     (uses 848
                            bytes-30K)

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 About Setup

 To install LAN Manager, use the Setup program on the LAN Manager Setup disk.
 Later, to remove or modify LAN Manager configurations, use the copy of Setup
 on your hard disk. To upgrade from a previous version of LAN Manager, see
 Chapter 8, "Upgrading from an Earlier LAN Manager Version," before using the
 Setup program.

 The Setup program is comprised of screens that lead you through the
 installation process. You can use either the keyboard or the mouse with
 Setup.

 Typically, Setup proposes a response to each prompt. If you are unsure about
 how to respond to a prompt, accept the proposed response. Many prompts have
 an equivalent entry in the LANMAN.INI file, the LAN Manager configuration
 file. Entry names used in the LANMAN.INI file are noted. For more
 information about LANMAN.INI, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 Reference.

 When you install LAN Manager, Setup makes copies of the existing CONFIG.SYS
 (or CONFIG.OS2 for a dual-boot computer) and STARTUP.CMD files on an MS OS/2
 computer, or the CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT files on an MS-DOS computer.
 The "Backing Up System Files" section, later in this chapter, describes how
 Setup makes the backup copies.

 Setup then adds entries to the CONFIG.SYS (or CONFIG.OS2), and STARTUP.CMD
 or AUTOEXEC.BAT files. If no STARTUP.CMD or AUTOEXEC.BAT file exists, Setup
 creates one.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Do not edit the lines Setup adds to your system files. Changing these lines
 can cause problems with LAN Manager and with the configuration Setup
 requires. You may need to change the location of the lines in the startup
 file (STARTUP.CMD or AUTOEXEC.BAT); see the "Backing Up System Files"
 section, later in this chapter.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Starting Setup

 When you install LAN Manager, use the Setup program on the installation
 disks. After installation, use the copy of the Setup program on your hard
 disk.

 To start the Setup program for installation:


   1.  Start the computer, and wait for the system prompt to appear.

   2.  Insert the Setup disk into a disk drive.

   3.  Make the disk drive containing the Setup disk the current drive.

       For example, if you inserted the Setup disk into drive A, type

       a:

   4.  At the system prompt, type

       setup

       If the computer has a monochrome or plasma monitor, type

       setup /mono

       The main screen for the Setup program appears, displaying the first
       full help screen, as shown in Figure 1.1.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       A scroll bar on the right side of a help screen indicates that there
       is more text to view. The scroll box, the small box superimposed on
       the scroll bar, shows the position of the information within the help
       screen in relation to the total text to be read.

   5.  Use the DOWN direction key or position the mouse pointer on the DOWN
       arrow of the scroll bar and click (press the left mouse button) to
       scroll through the rest of the help message.

   6.  To exit the help screen, press ENTER or click <OK>.


 To start the Setup program after installation:


   1.  If the computer is a server with local security, log on with an
       administrative account, using the logon or net logon command.

   2.  Make the directory containing the LAN Manager software the current
       directory.

       For example, if you installed LAN Manager software in C:\LANMAN, type

       c:

       cd c:\lanman

   3.  At the system prompt, type

       setup

       If the computer has a monochrome or plasma monitor, type

       setup /mono

       The main screen for the Setup program appears, displaying the first
       full help screen, as shown in Figure 1.1.

       A scroll bar on the right side of a help screen indicates that there
       is more text to view.

   4.  Use the DOWN direction key or position the mouse pointer on the DOWN
       arrow of the scroll bar and click to scroll through the rest of the
       help message.

   5.  To exit the help screen, press ENTER or click <OK>.



 Using Setup

 Setup contains a series of screens, menus (sets of commands), and dialog
 boxes (screens in which you type information or select options). The menus
 are presented in a menu bar at the top of the Setup Screen. Appendix E,
 "Setup Menus and Menu Commands," shows all of the Setup menus and menu
 commands. You perform a task by choosing a menu command (one of the entries
 in a menu), options in a dialog box, and a command button (a command
 represented by a word in angle brackets, such as <OK>). You can use the
 keyboard or the mouse to supply information.


 Using the Keyboard

 The following list describes general keyboard functions:

 Choose a menu from the menu bar
   To activate the menu bar, press F10 or ALT. Then, to highlight the menu
   you want to choose, use the LEFT and RIGHT direction keys. Press ENTER.
 or Press ALT and the highlighted letter in the menu name.

 Move between menus
   To move from menu to menu, use the LEFT and RIGHT direction keys, or TAB.

 Move between menu commands
   To move from menu command to menu command, use the UP and DOWN direction
   keys.

 Choose a menu command
   Press the highlighted letter in the command, or highlight the command and
   press ENTER.

 Move between fields in a dialog box
   To move to the next field, press TAB.

   To move to the previous field, press SHIFT+TAB.

 Type in a text box
   A text box is a field containing text. Most text boxes contain a default
   value; you can leave the value or change it.

   To move to a text box, press TAB. To replace the contents of a text box,
   begin typing.

   To change the contents of a text box without erasing what's there, use the
   direction keys, INS, and DEL.

   To move to the beginning of a text box, press HOME.

   To move to the end of a text box, press END.

 Scroll through a list box
   A list box is a box containing two or more items.

   To move to the list box, press TAB. To scroll through the list, use the UP
   and DOWN direction keys.

 Select items in a list box
   To move to the list box, press TAB. To highlight an item, use the
   direction keys. If the item is a check box, press the SPACEBAR to mark or
   unmark it.

 Mark or unmark a check box
   A check box is an on/off selection, like a light switch. The box,
   represented by square brackets ([ ]), contains an X when the check box is
   "on."

   To move to the check box, press TAB. Press the SPACEBAR to mark or unmark
   the check box.

 Select an option button
   An option button is a single selection among a group of options; only one
   option button can be selected in the group. The option button, represented
   by parentheses, contains a dot when the option is selected.

   To move to a group of option buttons, press TAB. Use the direction keys to
   select the desired option button.

 Select a command button
   To move to the command button, press TAB. Press ENTER.
 or Press ALT and the highlighted letter in the command button.

 Exit a dialog box
   To make changes and view the next dialog box (if any), press ENTER. (<OK>
   is always selected until you choose another command button.)

   To make changes and return to the main screen without viewing any other
   dialog boxes, choose <Done>.

   To return to the previous screen without making any changes, choose
   <Cancel> or press ESC.

 Exit a menu
   To exit a menu without making a selection, press ESC.


 Using the Mouse

 The following list describes general mouse functions:

 Select a menu, command, or dialog box item
   Position the mouse pointer on the desired item and click.

 Scroll through a list box
   Move the mouse pointer to the scroll bar. To scroll line by line in the
   desired direction, click the UP or DOWN arrow.

   To scroll page by page, click above or below the scroll box within the
   scroll bar.

 Exit a dialog box
   To make changes and view the next dialog box (if any), click <OK>.

   To make changes and return to the main screen without viewing any other
   dialog boxes, click <Done>.

   To return to the previous screen without making any changes, click
   <Cancel>.


 Online Help

 Setup provides two levels of online help:

 Full help
   This level of help provides a full screen of information before each
   dialog box, indicating what you are about to do and the information you
   will need.

 Specific help (F1)
   Whenever you press the F1 key, this level of help provides a small popup
   window with information about a particular item.

 The first time you use Setup, full help is provided. To change the help
 level:


   1.  From the Options menu, choose Program options.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 1.2 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Select the level of help you want.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 The Setup program on the installation disks always starts with full help
 selected. The Setup program copied to the computer's LAN Manager software
 directory retains the last level of help selected.


 Backing Up System Files

 The Setup program adds lines to the CONFIG.SYS file and to the system
 startup file (STARTUP.CMD for MS OS/2 or AUTOEXEC.BAT for MS-DOS). If no
 startup file exists, Setup creates one.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 CAUTION

 If the startup file contains an exit line at the end, Setup adds lines
 before the exit line. If an exit line appears in the middle, Setup adds
 lines to the end, and you must manually remove the exit command or move it
 to the end of the file. Otherwise, the lines added by Setup will not run.
  If the startup file includes lines that call other batch files, be sure
 that the lines added by Setup will be run. Move the lines, or for MS-DOS
 version 3.3 or later or for MS OS/2, be sure that each call is made with the
 call command so that control returns to the startup file after running the
 other batch file.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Setup provides two ways to maintain backup copies of the system files when
 making changes to the files:

 Decimal filename extensions
   This backup method creates a new backup copy each time you save the Setup
   configuration. Setup never writes over an existing backup file. The backup
   file has the filename of the system file, with a unique number as the
   filename extension. For example, the first backup copy of CONFIG.SYS is
   named CONFIG.001, the next backup copy is named CONFIG.002, and so on.

 .BAK filename extension
   This backup method copies the system file to the same filename, with the
   filename extension .BAK. If a .BAK file already exists, Setup writes over
   it, and the original .BAK file is lost. For example, the backup copy of
   CONFIG.SYS is named CONFIG.BAK, whether or not there was previously a
   CONFIG.BAK.

 The first time you use Setup, the .BAK method is selected. To change the
 backup method:


   1.  From the Options menu, choose Program options.

       The "Setup Program Options" dialog box (Figure 1.2) appears.

   2.  Select the backup method you want.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 The Setup program on the installation disks always starts with the .BAK
 method selected. The Setup program copied to the computer's LAN Manager
 software directory retains the last backup method selected.


 Tuning Server Performance

 When you install a server, the Setup program adjusts some LAN Manager memory
 settings to match the computer's available memory. Each time you run the
 Setup program after installation, it continues to adjust these settings.
 Based on the "Total memory," "Dedicated server," and "Maximum users" fields,
 Setup adjusts the "Maximum connections to server," "Number of large-transfer
 buffers," and "Number of request buffers" fields.

 If you decide to modify the memory settings yourself, you can turn off the
 automatic tuning feature. To change the automatic tuning feature:


   1.  From the Options menu, choose Program options.

       The "Setup Program Options" dialog box (Figure 1.2) appears.

   2.  Select "Yes" or "No" for automatic tuning.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 The Setup program on the installation disks always starts with automatic
 tuning selected; you cannot change the setting until installation is done.
 The Setup program copied to the computer's LAN Manager software directory
 retains the last setting selected.


 Exiting Setup

 After using Setup to install, remove, or modify LAN Manager, you must exit
 the Setup program. The CONFIG.SYS, STARTUP.CMD, and AUTOEXEC.BAT files
 remain unchanged until Setup is properly exited.

 If you choose <Cancel> during disk copying, copied files are automatically
 deleted. You can then exit the Setup program.

 To exit the Setup program:


   ş   From the Exit menu, choose Exit (or press F3 at any time).

       The system prompt appears.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 CAUTION

 Turning off or restarting the computer before properly exiting Setup causes
 the installation or modification process to be incomplete.
  If you inadvertently turn off the computer once disk copying has begun, use
 the Remove command from the Actions menu to delete the copied files and
 begin again. See Chapter 7, "Removing an Installation."
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ







 Chapter 2  Installing a Server
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To install a server, the computer must have a 286 or 386 microprocessor, a
 minimum of 5 megabytes of system memory (6 megabytes for a 386 server), and
 MS OS/2 version 1.2 (or IBM OS/2 version 1.2 CSD XR04053 or higher).

 For optimum performance, format the hard disk of a 386 server with at least
 one high-performance file system (HPFS) partition. HPFS is an MS OS/2
 installable file system, a file system that can be installed in place of the
 usual file allocation table (FAT) file system. HPFS is faster than the FAT
 file system and allows long names for directories and files (up to 254
 characters per directory or file name). For more information about the HPFS
 and FAT file systems, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).

 During installation, Setup replaces HPFS with the enhanced LAN Manager
 version, HPFS386. HPFS386 takes full advantage of the 32-bit capabilities of
 the 386 microprocessor. If HPFS is not installed, no enhancements are made
 to the operating system.

 Nine megabytes of system memory are recommended for servers with HPFS386. To
 install local security, where the user at the server's keyboard is subject
 to LAN Manager's security restrictions, the boot partition must be an
 HPFS386 partition. A server with HPFS386 cannot have a DOS session for MS
 OS/2. For details about HPFS, see your MS OS/2 manual(s). For information
 about local security, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.

 To include the drive mirroring and drive duplexing features of fault
 tolerance, protecting data from hardware failure, any partitions you want to
 mirror should be HPFS partitions. You can set up FAT partitions to be
 mirrored; the FAT partitions are reformatted as HPFS partitions. For more
 information about drive mirroring and drive duplexing, see Appendix A,
 "Setting Up the Fault-Tolerance System."

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 To install LAN Manager software on a partition protected by the
 fault-tolerance system, set up the fault-tolerance system first. Setting up
 the fault-tolerance system reformats the partition.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Before you begin, have available the manuals for the computer and network
 adapter card, and the LAN Manager disks.


 Installing LAN Manager Software

 To install LAN Manager software for a server:


   1.  Start the Setup program as described in Chapter 1, "Overview."

   2.  After reading the help screen that appears, choose <OK>.

   3.  From the Actions menu, choose Install.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   4.  From the "Product to install" options, select "Server."

   5.  Make changes to the remaining fields as needed:


     Source
       Is the drive letter where you will load the LAN Manager disks. The
       drive containing the Setup disk is the default drive.

     Destination
       Is the directory name where Setup will install LAN Manager and Setup
       files. Setup creates the directory if it doesn't exist. Type a
       pathname of 32 characters or fewer.

       Unless you have a reason not to, use the default path that is
       displayed (C:\LANMAN). To install HPFS386 with local security, install
       on the boot partition and be sure it is formatted for HPFS.


   1.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

   2.  To install LAN Manager and Setup software from the disks, follow the
       instructions that appear in the next series of dialog boxes. Setup and
       LAN Manager files are copied to the LAN Manager directory that Setup
       creates.

       A dialog box appears, asking if you want to import network device
       drivers.

   3.  To import network device drivers that were not supplied with the LAN
       Manager software, choose <Yes>.

       A dialog box appears, instructing you to insert a disk with additional
       network drivers. Continue with the following section, "Importing
       Additional Network Device Drivers."

       If you do not need to install additional network drivers, choose <No>.
       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>. A series of dialog boxes appear in which you
       define the primary parameters for the server. Continue with the
       "Defining Primary Parameters" section, later in this chapter.



 Importing Additional Network Device Drivers

 LAN Manager uses network device drivers (software that coordinates between
 the computer's software and hardware) to operate the network adapter card(s)
 in the computer: network adapter card drivers (also known as media access
 control drivers) control the physical function of the network adapter cards,
 and protocol drivers control the card drivers. Standard LAN Manager software
 includes many network device drivers to work with many brands of network
 adapter cards.

 You can also install network device drivers not supplied with LAN Manager if
 the network device driver is on a disk prepared for LAN Manager
 installation. Importing the driver means using the Setup program to transfer
 the driver software from its separate disk to the computer's LANMAN
 directory, where the driver is then treated as any other LAN Manager driver.

 If you are unsure about the network device drivers for your computer, do not
 import additional drivers now; you can import drivers later using the Import
 command from the Actions menu. For more information about network device
 drivers, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 To import additional network device drivers:


   1.  Insert a network device driver disk and choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears, displaying the network drivers
       available for import:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Network adapter cards" list box, select the card drivers you
       want to import.

   3.  In the "Protocols" list box, select the protocols you want to import.

   4.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   5.  If you have another network driver disk, choose <Yes> and return to
       the beginning of this procedure.

       If you are done importing network device drivers, choose <No>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       A series of dialog boxes appear in which you define the primary
       parameters for the server.



 Defining Primary Parameters

 Primary parameters determine how the server operates. Many parameters have
 an equivalent entry in the LANMAN.INI file. Entry names used in the
 LANMAN.INI file are noted. For more information about LANMAN.INI, see the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If the computer uses Micro Channel(tm) architecture (MCA), it has a
 DISK02.SYS disk driver file in the root directory of the boot partition
 (usually C:\). The Setup program may offer to replace this driver with an
 enhanced version for HPFS386. Accept the enhanced DISK02.SYS driver unless
 the existing DISK02.SYS driver has been modified for some other purpose. The
 Setup program renames the existing DISK02.SYS file, and restores it if you
 remove LAN Manager.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Primary Parameters Dialog Box

 The "Primary Parameters" dialog box specifies the name and other essential
 settings for the computer:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To define the primary parameters:


   1.  In the "Computername" text box (computername in LANMAN.INI), type a
       computername for this server.

       The computername is the name by which users connect to and send
       messages to this server. The computername can have as many as 15
       characters, including letters, numbers, and the following characters:

       ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

       Each computername must be unique on the local-area network or any
       other network to which this network is connected, though it can be the
       same as the username for the user of this computer.

   2.  In the "Username" text box (username in LANMAN.INI), type a name for
       the user.

       The username is the name by which an administrator assigns permissions
       to use resources. The username can have as many as 20 characters and
       can be the same as the computername. The default is "USER."

   3.  In the "Domain" text box (domain in LANMAN.INI), type the name of the
       domain in which this server will participate.

       A domain is a number of computers that an administrator groups for
       administrative and security purposes. The name of a domain can have as
       many as 15 characters and cannot be the same as a computername. The
       default is "DOMAIN."

   4.  To have LAN Manager start automatically whenever the computer is
       started, select "Yes" from the "Autostart at boot time" option
       buttons.

   5.  Type the amount of memory, in kilobytes, in the computer (1 megabyte =
       1024 kilobytes).

       This value affects LAN Manager's memory usage and the size of the disk
       cache.

       Memory usage is controlled by various entries in the LANMAN.INI file.
       The disk cache is controlled by lines in CONFIG.SYS: the diskcache
       line for FAT file systems, and ifs=hpfs386.ifs and run=cache.exe lines
       for HPFS386.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The "Network Drivers" dialog box appears.



 Network Drivers Dialog Box

 The "Network Drivers" dialog box specifies which network device drivers are
 installed in this computer. Network device drivers include network adapter
 card drivers and protocols (which communicate between LAN Manager and the
 network adapter cards).

 You can have one network adapter card with one or more protocols, or
 multiple cards with the same protocol. Only one protocol of the same type
 (for example, ending with BEUI) can be used per network adapter card.

 If there is more than one protocol available and you are not sure which
 protocol to select, consult your administrator or see the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 The "Network Drivers" dialog box looks like this:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To install network device drivers:


   1.  In the "Network adapter cards" list box, select a network adapter card
       in the computer.

   2.  Choose >.

       The network adapter card is added to the top of the "Network
       configuration" list box.

       If only one protocol is available, it is automatically selected to
       work with this card. Skip to step 6.

       If the network adapter card driver is monolithic (it includes its own
       protocol), the word "Monolithic" appears next to it. Skip to step 6.

   3.  If more than one protocol is available in the "Protocols" list box,
       select the protocol to be used with this driver.

   4.  Choose <Add protocol>.

       The protocol appears in the "Network configuration" list box.

   5.  To use more than one protocol with this network adapter card, repeat
       steps 3 and 4.

   6.  To install more than one network adapter card, repeat steps 1-5.

   7.  To delete a protocol from the "Network configuration" list box, select
       that protocol, and choose > (or press ALT+R).

   8.  To delete a network adapter card from the "Network configuration" list
       box, delete the protocols associated with that card. Then, select the
       card and choose > (or press ALT+R).

       NOTE  Hardware settings for the network adapter card are included in
       the PROTOCOL.INI file. If these settings are incorrect or incomplete,
       the system will not operate correctly. You may need to adjust the
       CONFIG.SYS, LANMAN.INI, and PROTOCOL.INI files. For more information,
       see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide and the
       manufacturer's documentation for the network adapter card.

   9.  Choose <OK>.

      The "Server Primary Parameters" dialog box appears.



 Server Primary Parameters Dialog Box

 The "Server Primary Parameters" dialog box contains primary parameters for
 servers:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 This dialog box has the following fields:

 Services to autostart (srvservices in LANMAN.INI)
   Lists the services to be started automatically each time the server is
   started. (In a later dialog box, you select services to be started when
   the workstation is started without the Server service.)

     Alerter
       Sends administrative alerts over the network.

     Netrun
       Shares the server's memory with workstations.

     Replicator
       Maintains identical copies of selected directories and files on
       several servers (or MS OS/2 workstations running the Peer service)
       simultaneously.

     UPS
       Provides warning messages to users when a power failure occurs and
       initiates an orderly shutdown.

     Netlogon
       Determines how servers with user-level security validate logon
       requests. This service is ignored on a server with share-level
       security.

     Remoteboot
       Lets the server start up workstations remotely.

     Timesource
       Identifies a network time server to which other servers can
       synchronize their clocks.

 Security (security in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the level of security (the default is "User"):

     User
       Specifies user-level security, which controls access to the server's
       resources on a per-person basis. The administrator defines exactly
       which users can use each resource.

     Share
       Specifies share-level security, which controls access on a
       per-resource basis. The administrator assigns a password to each
       resource and distributes the password to the users who need it.

 Local security
   Specifies whether to install local security on servers with HPFS386 (the
   LAN Manager version of the MS OS/2 1.2 high-performance file system).
   Local security requires permissions to access any local file or directory
   in an HPFS386 partition, whether or not the resource is shared. You can
   alter this field only if the boot partition is an HPFS386 partition.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 A server with local security should have user-level security.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

   If the boot partition is an HPFS386 partition and you want to implement
   local security, select "Yes."

   The default is "No."

 Hidden server (srvhidden in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies whether the server appears in lists of network servers.

   The default is "No," meaning that the server appears in the lists.

 Dedicated server
   Specifies a computer that is used primarily as a server, rather than for
   running applications locally. The default, "Yes," allocates most of the
   computer's memory for LAN Manager, leaving a minimum amount of memory for
   the local user.

   If you select "No," more memory is available for running programs on the
   server, but LAN Manager software does not operate as efficiently.

 Maximum users (maxusers in LANMAN.INI)
   Sets the maximum number of users who can use the server simultaneously.
   This affects LAN Manager's memory buffer usage.

   The range is 1-1000; the default is 10.

   A LAN Manager server allows five users to simultaneously access disk,
   printer, and communication devices. After installing LAN Manager, you can
   apply Additional User Paks (10 User Paks or an Unlimited User Pak) to
   expand this number of users.

   The total value of "Maximum users" should include the number allowed by
   your Additional User Pak(s) plus the number of users accessing the server
   through IPC connections (named pipes used by network application programs
   such as the net run command or Microsoft SQL Server).

   For example, if you have a 25-user server and you want to allow 10
   additional users to access the server through network application
   programs, you would set "Maximum users" to 35.

 User directories path (userpath in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the pathname of the directory containing the user directories.
   If the pathname does not start with a drive letter or a backslash, it is
   assumed to be relative to the LANMAN directory.

   The default path is ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS.

 Guest account name (guestacct in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the username of the server's guest account. The guest account
   controls access to shared resources for users who do not have a user
   account.

   The guest account name can have as many as 20 characters. If you leave
   this entry blank or if there is no user account with this name, users must
   have a user account to access the shared resources on this server.

   The default is "GUEST."

 Auto-disconnect time (autodisconnect in LANMAN.INI)
   For a server with an Unlimited User Pak, sets the time the server waits
   before disconnecting an inactive session. Disconnecting inactive sessions
   frees server resources for other people to use.

   The default value -1 means that the server never disconnects an inactive
   session. For a server with an Unlimited User Pak, a suggested value is 120
   minutes.

 Default remote server (remote in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the computername of a server you will regularly administer from
   this computer. When you start the LAN Manager Screen for administrators,
   the focus is set on this remote server.

 Server comment (srvcomment in LANMAN.INI)
   Sets the server's comment, which is seen by other network users. A comment
   can have as many as 48 characters.

 To set primary parameters for the server:


   1.  Make changes to the fields as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The "Workstation Primary Parameters" dialog box appears.



 Workstation Primary Parameters Dialog Box

 The "Workstation Primary Parameters" dialog box contains the workstation
 primary parameters used for servers:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 This dialog box has the following fields:

 Services to autostart (wrkservices in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the workstation services you want to start automatically each
   time the workstation is started:

     Messenger
       Lets you send and receive messages on the local-area network.

     Netpopup
       Displays messages in a popup window as they arrive.

 Other domains to monitor (othdomains in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the names of as many as four additional domains in which the
   server can participate.

 To set primary parameters for the workstation:


   1.  Make changes to the fields as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The final installation dialog box appears.



 Completing the Installation

 The final installation dialog box lets you complete the installation
 process:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To complete the installation:


   1.  If you are not done installing LAN Manager (you want to make further
       changes), choose <No>.

       The main screen is displayed. For more information, see Chapter 6,
       "Managing the Configuration."

       If you are done with the installation, choose <Yes>.

       Setup saves the current configuration, and exits the program.

   2.  When the MS OS/2 prompt appears, use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager
       Shutdown command to restart the computer. For details, see your MS
       OS/2 manual(s).

   3.  If local security is installed, Setup briefly displays a screen
       indicating the installation is being completed, then exits to the MS
       OS/2 prompt. Again, use the Shutdown command to restart the computer.


 This computer is now installed as a standalone server (not participating in
 domain-wide security). The administrative account for this server has the
 default administrator's name, admin, and the default administrator's
 password, password.

 To install the fault-tolerance system at this time, see Appendix A, "Setting
 Up the Fault-Tolerance System."

 To view or modify the installation configuration, see Chapter 6, "Managing
 the Configuration."

 For more information about setting up, using, and fine-tuning the
 performance of a server, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide
 and the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference.






 Chapter 3  Installing an MS OS/2 Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To install an MS OS/2 workstation, the computer must have a 286 or 386
 microprocessor, a minimum of 3 megabytes of system memory, and MS OS/2
 version 1.1 or version 1.2.

 Four megabytes of system memory are recommended for workstations with MS
 OS/2 1.1 and 4.5 megabytes for workstations with MS OS/2 1.2.

 To run the Peer service, MS OS/2 version 1.2 must be installed. The required
 amount of memory is 3.5 megabytes, and the recommended amount is 5
 megabytes.

 Before you begin, have available the manuals for the computer and network
 adapter card, and the LAN Manager disks.


 Installing LAN Manager Software

 To install LAN Manager software for a workstation:


   1.  Start the Setup program as described in Chapter 1, "Overview."

   2.  After reading the help screen that appears, choose <OK>.

   3.  From the Actions menu, choose Install.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   4.  From the "Product to install" options, select "MS OS/2 workstation."

   5.  Make changes to the remaining fields as needed:


     Source
       Is the drive letter where you will load the LAN Manager disks. The
       drive containing the Setup disk is the default drive.

     Destination
       Is the directory name where Setup will install LAN Manager and Setup
       files. Setup creates the directory if it doesn't exist. Type a
       pathname of 32 characters or fewer. All directory names in the path
       must be 8 or fewer characters (with an optional 3-character
       extension).

       Unless you have a reason not to, use the default path that is
       displayed (C:\LANMAN).


   1.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected and you have MS OS/2 version 1.2, a help
       screen appears. After reading the help screen, choose <OK>.

   2.  If you have MS OS/2 version 1.2, the Peer service installation dialog
       box appears. Continue with the following section.

       If you have MS OS/2 version 1.1, follow the instructions that appear
       on the next series of dialog boxes to copy Setup and the LAN Manager
       software from the disks. Setup and LAN Manager files are copied to the
       LAN Manager directory that Setup creates.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears after copying disks.
       After reading the help screen, choose <OK>.

       A dialog box appears, asking if you want to import network device
       drivers.

   3.  To import network device drivers that were not supplied with the LAN
       Manager software, choose <Yes>.

       A dialog box appears, instructing you to insert a disk with additional
       network drivers. Continue with the "Importing Additional Network
       Device Drivers" section.

       If you do not need to install additional network drivers, choose <No>.
       A series of dialog boxes appear in which you define the primary
       parameters for the workstation. Continue with the "Defining Primary
       Parameters" section, later in this chapter.



 Peer Service Installation Dialog Box

 Installing the Peer service allows this workstation to share designated
 files, one printer, and one communication device (such as a modem) with one
 other user at a time.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 A modem can only be shared with another MS OS/2 workstation.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The Peer service installation dialog box looks like this:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To install the Peer service:


   1.  Choose <Yes>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       A dialog box appears, asking if you want to import network device
       drivers.

   2.  To import network device drivers that were not supplied with the LAN
       Manager software, choose <Yes>.

       A dialog box appears, instructing you to insert a disk with additional
       network drivers. Continue with the following section.

       If you do not need to install additional network drivers, choose <No>.
       A series of dialog boxes appear in which you define the primary
       parameters for the workstation. Continue with the "Defining Primary
       Parameters" section, later in this chapter.



 Importing Additional Network Device Drivers

 LAN Manager uses network device drivers (software that coordinates between
 the computer's software and hardware) to operate the network adapter card(s)
 in the computer: network adapter card drivers (also known as media access
 control drivers) control the physical function of the network adapter cards,
 and protocol drivers control the card drivers. Standard LAN Manager software
 includes many network device drivers to work with many brands of network
 adapter cards.

 You can also install network device drivers not supplied with LAN Manager if
 the network device driver is on a disk prepared for LAN Manager
 installation. Importing the driver means using the Setup program to transfer
 the driver software from its separate disk to the computer's LANMAN
 directory, where the driver is then treated as any other LAN Manager driver.

 If you are unsure about the network device drivers for your computer, do not
 import additional drivers now; you can import drivers later using the Import
 command from the Actions menu. For more information about network device
 drivers, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 To import additional network device drivers:


   1.  Insert a network device driver disk and choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears, displaying the network drivers
       available for import:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Network adapter cards" list box, select the card drivers you
       want to import.

   3.  In the "Protocols" list box, select the protocols you want to import.

   4.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   5.  If you have another network driver disk, choose <Yes> and return to
       the beginning of this procedure.

       If you are done importing network device drivers, choose <No>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       A series of dialog boxes appear in which you define the primary
       parameters for the workstation.



 Defining Primary Parameters

 Primary parameters determine how the workstation operates. Many parameters
 have an equivalent entry in the LANMAN.INI file. Entry names used in the
 LANMAN.INI file are noted. For more information about LANMAN.INI, see the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference.


 Primary Parameters Dialog Box

 The "Primary Parameters" dialog box specifies the name and other essential
 settings for the computer:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To define the primary parameters:


   1.  In the "Computername" text box (computername in LANMAN.INI), type a
       computername for this workstation.

       The computername is the name by which users connect to and send
       messages to this server. The computername can have as many as 15
       characters, including letters, numbers and the following characters:

       ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

       Each computername must be unique on the local-area network or any
       other network to which this network is connected, though it can be the
       same as the username for the user of this computer.

   2.  In the "Username" text box (username in LANMAN.INI), type a name for
       the user.

       The username is the name by which an administrator assigns permissions
       to use resources. The username can have as many as 20 characters and
       can be the same as the computername. The default is "USER."

   3.  In the "Domain" text box (domain in LANMAN.INI), type the name of the
       domain in which this workstation will participate.

       A domain is a number of computers that an administrator groups for
       administrative and security purposes. The name of a domain can have as
       many as 15 characters and cannot be the same as a computername. The
       default is "DOMAIN."

   4.  To have LAN Manager start automatically whenever the computer is
       started, select "Yes" from the "Autostart at boot time" option
       buttons.

   5.  Type the amount of memory, in kilobytes, in the computer (1 megabyte =
       1024 kilobytes).

       This value affects LAN Manager's memory usage. Memory usage is
       controlled by various entries in the LANMAN.INI file.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The "Network Drivers" dialog box appears.



 Network Drivers Dialog Box

 The "Network Drivers" dialog box specifies which network device drivers are
 installed in this computer. Network device drivers include network adapter
 card drivers and protocols (which communicate between LAN Manager and the
 network adapter cards).

 You can have one network adapter card with one or more protocols or multiple
 cards with the same protocol. Only one protocol of the same type (for
 example, ending with BEUI) can be used per network adapter card.

 If there is more than one protocol available and you are not sure which
 protocol to select, consult your administrator or see the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 The "Network Drivers" dialog box looks like this:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To install network device drivers:


   1.  In the "Network adapter cards" list box, select a network adapter card
       in the computer.

   2.  Choose >.

       The network adapter card is added to the top of the "Network
       configuration" list box.

       If only one protocol is available, it is automatically selected to
       work with this card. Skip to step 6.

       If the network adapter card driver is monolithic (it includes its own
       protocol), the word "Monolithic" appears next to it. Skip to step 6.

   3.  If more than one protocol is available in the "Protocols" list box,
       select the protocol to be used with this driver.

   4.  Choose <Add protocol>.

       The protocol appears in the "Network configuration" list box.

   5.  To use more than one protocol with this network adapter card, repeat
       steps 3 and 4.

   6.  To install more than one network adapter card, repeat steps 1-5.

   7.  To delete a protocol from the "Network configuration" list box, select
       that protocol and choose > (or press ALT+R).

   8.  To delete a network adapter card from the "Network configuration" list
       box, delete the protocols associated with that card. Then, select the
       card and choose > (or press ALT+R).

       NOTE  Hardware settings for the network adapter card are included in
       the PROTOCOL.INI file. If these settings are incorrect or incomplete,
       the system will not operate correctly. You may need to adjust the
       CONFIG.SYS, LANMAN.INI, and PROTOCOL.INI files. For more information,
       see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide and the
       manufacturer's documentation for the network adapter card.

   9.  Choose <OK>.

      If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the help
      screen, choose <OK>.

      If you installed the Peer service, continue with the following section.
      If not, continue with the "Workstation Primary Parameters Dialog Box"
      section.



 Server Primary Parameters Dialog Box

 The "Server Primary Parameters" dialog box contains primary parameters for
 MS OS/2 workstations with the Peer service:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 This dialog box has the following fields:

 Services to autostart (srvservices in LANMAN.INI)
   Lists the services to be started automatically each time the Peer service
   is started. (In a later dialog box, you select services to be started when
   the workstation is started without the Peer service.)

     Alerter
       Sends administrative alerts over the network.

     Netrun
       Shares the workstation's memory with other workstations.

     Replicator
       Maintains identical copies of selected directories and files on
       several servers (or MS OS/2 workstations running the Peer service)
       simultaneously.

     UPS
       Provides warning messages to users when a power failure occurs and
       initiates an orderly shutdown.

 Security (security in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the level of security (the default is "User"):

     User
       Specifies user-level security, which controls access to the
       workstation's resources on a per-person basis. The workstation owner
       defines exactly which users can use each resource.

     Share
       Specifies share-level security, which controls access on a
       per-resource basis. The workstation owner assigns a password to each
       resource and distributes each password to the users who need it.

 Local security
   Local security is not available to workstations with the Peer service.

 Hidden server (srvhidden in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies whether the workstation appears in lists of network servers.

   The default is "Yes," meaning that the workstation does not appear in the
   lists.

 Dedicated server
   The "Dedicated server" option is not available to workstations with the
   Peer service.

 Maximum users (maxusers in LANMAN.INI)
   Sets the maximum number of users who can use the workstation
   simultaneously. This value affects LAN Manager's memory buffer usage.

   The range is 1-100; the default is 10.

   The workstation is limited to one remote user at a time for disk, printer,
   and communication devices. Any number of users can access the workstation
   through IPC connections (named pipes used by network application programs
   such as the net run command or Microsoft SQL Server). Therefore, set
   "Maximum users" to 1 plus the number of users you want to let access the
   workstation through IPC connections.

 User directories path (userpath in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the pathname of the directory containing the user directories.
   If the pathname does not start with a drive letter or a backslash, it is
   assumed to be relative to the LANMAN directory. This field usually applies
   only to a server.

   The default path is ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS.

 Guest account name (guestacct in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the username of the guest account. The guest account controls
   access to shared resources for users who do not have a user account.

   The guest account name can have as many as 20 characters. If you leave
   this entry blank or if there is no user account with this name, users must
   have a user account to access the shared resources on this workstation.

   The default is "GUEST."

 Auto-disconnect time (autodisconnect in LANMAN.INI)
   Automatic disconnection is not available to workstations with the Peer
   service.

 Default remote server (remote in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the computername of a server you will regularly administer from
   this computer. When you start the LAN Manager Screen for administrators,
   the focus is set on this remote server.

 Server comment (srvcomment in LANMAN.INI)
   Sets a comment, which is seen by other network users. A comment can have
   as many as 48 characters.

 To set primary parameters for an MS OS/2 workstation running the Peer
 service:


   1.  Make changes to the fields as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The "Workstation Primary Parameters" dialog box appears.



 Workstation Primary Parameters Dialog Box

 The "Workstation Primary Parameters" dialog box contains the workstation
 primary parameters:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 This dialog box has the following fields:

 Services to autostart (wrkservices in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the workstation services you want to start automatically each
   time the workstation is started:

     Messenger
       Lets you send and receive messages on the local-area network.

     Netpopup
       Displays messages in a popup window as they arrive.

     Peer
       Shares the workstation's resources with other users. If you intend to
       use the Peer service only occasionally, leave this check box unmarked.

 Other domains to monitor (othdomains in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the names of as many as four additional domains in which the
   workstation can participate.

 To set primary parameters for the workstation:


   1.  Make changes to the fields as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The final installation dialog box appears.



 Completing the Installation

 The final installation dialog box lets you complete the installation
 process:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To complete the installation:


   1.  If you are not done installing LAN Manager (you want to make further
       changes), choose <No>.

       The main screen is displayed. For more information, see Chapter 6,
       "Managing the Configuration."

       If you are done with the installation, choose <Yes>.

       Setup saves the current configuration and exits the program.

   2.  When the MS OS/2 prompt appears, use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager
       Shutdown command to restart the computer. For details, see your MS
       OS/2 manual(s).


 This computer is now installed as a workstation. If you installed the Peer
 service with user-level security, the administrative account for this
 workstation has the default administrator's name, admin, and the default
 administrator's password, password.

 To view or modify the installation configuration, see Chapter 6, "Managing
 the Configuration."

 For more information about using an MS OS/2 workstation, see the Microsoft
 LAN Manager User's Guide for MS OS/2.

 For more information about using and fine-tuning the performance of the Peer
 service, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide and the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference.






 Chapter 4  Installing LAN Manager Enhanced on an MS-DOS Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To install an MS-DOS workstation, the computer must have an 8086/88, 286, or
 386 microprocessor, a minimum of 512 kilobytes (K) of system memory, and
 MS-DOS version 3.1 or later. For optimum performance, 640K or more of system
 memory is recommended.

 Before you begin, have available the manuals for the computer and network
 adapter card, and the LAN Manager disks.


 Installing LAN Manager Enhanced Software

 To install LAN Manager Enhanced software for an MS-DOS workstation:


   1.  Start the Setup program as described in Chapter 1, "Overview."

   2.  After reading the help screen that appears, choose <OK>.

   3.  From the Actions menu, choose Install.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   4.  From the "Product to install" options, select "Enhanced workstation
       for MS-DOS."

   5.  Make changes to the remaining fields as needed:


     Source
       Is the drive letter where you will load the LAN Manager disks. The
       drive containing the Setup disk is the default drive.

     Destination
       Is the directory name where Setup will install LAN Manager and Setup
       files. Setup creates the directory if it doesn't exist. Type a
       pathname of 32 characters or fewer.

       Unless you have a reason not to, use the default path that is
       displayed (C:\LANMAN.DOS).


   1.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

   2.  Follow the instructions that appear on the next series of dialog boxes
       to copy Setup and the LAN Manager software from the disks. Setup and
       LAN Manager files are copied to the LAN Manager directory that Setup
       creates.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears after copying disks.
       After reading the help screen, choose <OK>.

       A dialog box appears, asking if you want to import network device
       drivers.

   3.  To import network device drivers that were not supplied with the LAN
       Manager software, choose <Yes>.

       A dialog box appears, instructing you to insert a disk with additional
       network drivers. Continue with the following section, "Importing
       Additional Network Device Drivers."

       If you do not need to install additional network drivers, choose <No>.
       A series of dialog boxes appear in which you define the primary
       parameters for the workstation. Continue with the "Defining Primary
       Parameters" section, later in this chapter.



 Importing Additional Network Device Drivers

 LAN Manager uses network device drivers (software that coordinates between
 the computer's software and hardware) to operate the network adapter card(s)
 in the computer: network adapter card drivers (also known as media access
 control drivers) control the physical function of the network adapter cards,
 and protocol drivers control the card drivers. Standard LAN Manager software
 includes many network device drivers to work with many brands of network
 adapter cards.

 You can also install network device drivers not supplied with LAN Manager if
 the network device driver is on a disk prepared for LAN Manager
 installation. Importing the driver means using the Setup program to transfer
 the driver software from its separate disk to the computer's LANMAN.DOS
 directory, where the driver is then treated as any other LAN Manager driver.

 If you are unsure about the network device drivers for your computer, do not
 import additional drivers now; you can import drivers later using the Import
 command from the Actions menu. For more information about network device
 drivers, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 To import additional network device drivers:


   1.  Insert a network device driver disk and choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears, displaying the network drivers
       available for import:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Network adapter cards" list box, select the card drivers you
       want to import.

   3.  In the "Protocols" list box, select the protocols you want to import.

   4.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   5.  If you have another network driver disk, choose <Yes> and return to
       the beginning of this procedure.

       If you are done importing network device drivers, choose <No>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       A series of dialog boxes appear in which you define the primary
       parameters for the workstation.



 Defining Primary Parameters

 Primary parameters determine how the workstation operates. Many parameters
 have an equivalent entry in the LANMAN.INI file. Entry names used in the
 LANMAN.INI file are noted. For more information about LANMAN.INI, see the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference.


 Primary Parameters Dialog Box

 The "Primary Parameters" dialog box specifies the name and other essential
 settings for the computer:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To define the primary parameters:


   1.  In the "Computername" text box (computername in LANMAN.INI), type a
       computername for this workstation.

       The computername is the name by which users connect to and send
       messages to this server. The computername can have as many as 15
       characters, including letters, numbers, and the following characters:

       ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

       Each computername must be unique on the local-area network or any
       other network to which this network is connected, though it can be the
       same as the username for the user of this computer.

   2.  In the "Username" text box (username in LANMAN.INI), type a name for
       the user.

       The username is the name by which an administrator assigns permissions
       to use resources. The username can have as many as 20 characters and
       can be the same as the computername. The default is "USER."

   3.  In the "Domain" text box (domain in LANMAN.INI), type the name of the
       domain in which this workstation will participate.

       A domain is a number of computers that an administrator groups for
       administrative and security purposes. The name of a domain can have as
       many as 15 characters and cannot be the same as a computername. The
       default is "DOMAIN."

   4.  To have LAN Manager start automatically whenever the computer is
       started, select "Yes" from the "Autostart at boot time" option
       buttons.

   5.  Type the amount of memory, in kilobytes, in the computer (1 megabyte =
       1024 kilobytes).

       This value affects LAN Manager's memory usage. Memory usage is
       controlled by various entries in the LANMAN.INI file.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The "Network Drivers" dialog box appears.



 Network Drivers Dialog Box

 The "Network Drivers" dialog box specifies which network device drivers are
 installed in this computer. Network device drivers include network adapter
 card drivers and protocols (which communicate between LAN Manager and the
 network adapter cards).

 You can have one network adapter card with one or more protocols or multiple
 cards with the same protocol. Only one protocol of the same type (for
 example, ending with BEUI) can be used per network adapter card.

 If there is more than one protocol available and you are not sure which
 protocol to select, consult your administrator or see the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 The "Network Drivers" dialog box looks like this:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To install network device drivers:


   1.  In the "Network adapter cards" list box, select a network adapter card
       in the computer.

   2.  Choose >.

       The network adapter card is added to the top of the "Network
       configuration" list box.

       If only one protocol is available, it is automatically selected to
       work with this card. Skip to step 6.

       If the network adapter card driver is monolithic (it includes its own
       protocol), the word "Monolithic" appears next to it. Skip to step 6.

   3.  If more than one protocol is available in the "Protocols" list box,
       select the protocol to be used with this driver.

   4.  Choose <Add protocol>.

       The protocol appears in the "Network configuration" list box.

   5.  To use more than one protocol with this network adapter card, repeat
       steps 3 and 4.

   6.  To install more than one network adapter card, repeat steps 1-5.

   7.  To delete a protocol from the "Network configuration" list box, select
       that protocol and choose > (or press ALT+R).

   8.  To delete a network adapter card from the "Network configuration" list
       box, delete the protocols associated with that card. Then, select the
       card and choose > (or press ALT+R).

       NOTE  Hardware settings for the network adapter card are included in
       the PROTOCOL.INI file. If these settings are incorrect or incomplete,
       the system will not operate correctly. You may need to adjust the
       CONFIG.SYS, LANMAN.INI, and PROTOCOL.INI files. For more information,
       see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide and the
       manufacturer's documentation for the network adapter card.

   9.  Choose <OK>.

      If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the help
      screen, choose <OK>.

      The "Workstation Primary Parameters" dialog box appears.



 Workstation Primary Parameters Dialog Box

 The "Workstation Primary Parameters" dialog box contains the workstation
 primary parameters:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 This dialog box has the following fields:

 Services to autostart (wrkservices in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the workstation services you want to start automatically each
   time the workstation is started:

     Messenger
       Lets you send and receive messages on the local-area network.

     Netpopup
       Displays messages as they are received in a popup window.

     Encrypt
       Converts usernames and passwords into a coded form for extra security
       before transmitting them over the network.

 Other domains to monitor (othdomains in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the names of as many as four additional domains in which the
   workstation can participate.

 To set primary parameters for the workstation:


   1.  Make changes to the fields as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The "Windows Selection" dialog box appears.



 Windows Selection Dialog Box

 If you have Microsoft Windows(tm) installed, you can choose to use LAN
 Manager with Windows. If you use Microsoft Windows, the Windows version of
 the Netpopup service, Winpopup, is installed.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Start LAN Manager using the net start workstation command before starting
 Windows.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 If you plan to install Microsoft Windows in the future, install LAN Manager
 now without Windows support. After installing Windows, run the LAN Manager
 Setup program again, and then select Windows support.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Later in this installation you can install an expanded memory manager. If
 you already use an expanded memory manager with Microsoft Windows, do not
 install the LAN Manager expanded memory manager.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The "Windows Selection" dialog box looks like this:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To make your choice about Microsoft Windows:


   1.  Select whether you want to run LAN Manager with or without Microsoft
       Windows.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       If you choose to run LAN Manager with Windows, a dialog box appears to
       confirm the pathname of the Windows configuration file (WIN.INI). Type
       the correct pathname, if necessary, then choose <OK>.

       If the computer already uses a memory manager or has an 8086/88
       microprocessor, continue with the "Completing the Installation"
       section.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The "Memory Managers" dialog box appears.



 Memory Managers Dialog Box

 LAN Manager offers two memory manager device drivers to help the computer
 use its memory:


   ş   The Lotus(R)/Intel(R)/Microsoft 4.0 (LIM 4.0) expanded memory manager
       (EMM386.DOS) makes memory beyond the MS-DOS 640K limit available to
       the computer as expanded memory (extra memory used by certain
       applications).

       If you have an AT-compatible computer with a 386 microprocessor, have
       more than 64K of extended memory, and do not have another expanded
       memory manager installed, LAN Manager can install the LIM 4.0 memory
       manager.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If you are already using an expanded memory manager with Microsoft Windows,
 do not install the LIM 4.0 memory
 manager.ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


       You may need to adjust some options of the LIM 4.0 memory manager
       after installation. Appendix B, "The LIM 4.0 Expanded Memory Manager,"
       provides more information about LIM 4.0 options.

   ş   The HIMEM.DOS extended memory manager uses 64K of the computer's
       extended memory (memory beyond the 1-megabyte limit) to run parts of
       the LAN Manager workstation software. This leaves more memory below
       the 1-megabyte limit for other applications.

       If you have a 286 or 386 microprocessor, have more than 64K of
       extended memory, and do not have another extended memory manager
       installed, LAN Manager can install the HIMEM.DOS memory manager.


 The "Memory Managers" dialog box looks like this:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To install a memory manager:


   1.  If you do not want to install any memory managers, select "No" for
       both memory managers.

   2.  To install the HIMEM.DOS extended memory manager, select "Yes."

   3.  To install the LIM 4.0 expanded memory manager, select "Yes."

   4.  Choose <OK>.

       The final installation dialog box appears.



 Completing the Installation

 The final installation dialog box lets you complete the installation
 process:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To complete the installation:


   1.  If you are not done installing LAN Manager (you want to make further
       changes), choose <No>.

       The main screen is displayed. For more information, see Chapter 6,
       "Managing the Configuration."

       If you are done with the installation, choose <Yes>.

       Setup saves the current configuration and exits the program.

   2.  When the MS-DOS prompt appears, restart the computer. For details, see
       your MS-DOS manual(s).


 This computer is now installed as a workstation.

 To view or modify the installation configuration, see Chapter 6, "Managing
 the Configuration."

 For more information about using an MS-DOS workstation, see the Microsoft
 LAN Manager User's Guide for MS-DOS.






 Chapter 5  Installing LAN Manager Basic on an MS-DOS Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To install an MS-DOS workstation, the computer must have an 8086/88, 286, or
 386 microprocessor, a minimum of 512 kilobytes (K) of system memory, and
 MS-DOS version 3.1 or later installed. For optimum performance, 640K or more
 of system memory is recommended.

 Before you begin, have available the manuals for the computer and network
 adapter card, and the LAN Manager disks.


 Installing LAN Manager Basic Software

 To install LAN Manager Basic software for an MS-DOS workstation:


   1.  Start the Setup program as described in Chapter 1, "Overview."

   2.  After reading the help screen that appears, choose <OK>.

   3.  From the Actions menu, choose Install.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   4.  From the "Product to install" options, select "Basic workstation for
       MS-DOS."

   5.  Make changes to the remaining fields as needed:


     Source
       Is the drive letter where you will load the LAN Manager disks. The
       drive containing the Setup disk is the default drive.

     Destination
       Is the directory name where Setup will install LAN Manager and Setup
       files. Setup creates the directory if it doesn't exist. Type a
       pathname of 32 characters or fewer.

       Unless you have a reason not to, use the default path that is
       displayed (C:\LANMAN.DOS).


   1.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

   2.  Follow the instructions that appear on the next series of dialog boxes
       to copy Setup and the LAN Manager software from the disks. Setup and
       LAN Manager files are copied to the LAN Manager directory that Setup
       creates.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears after copying disks.
       After reading the help screen, choose <OK>.

       A dialog box appears, asking if you want to import network device
       drivers.

   3.  To import network device drivers that were not supplied with the LAN
       Manager software, choose <Yes>.

       A dialog box appears, instructing you to insert a disk with additional
       network drivers. Continue with the following section, "Importing
       Additional Network Device Drivers."

       If you do not need to install additional network drivers, choose <No>.
       A series of dialog boxes appear in which you define the primary
       parameters for the workstation. Continue with the "Defining Primary
       Parameters" section, later in this chapter.



 Importing Additional Network Device Drivers

 LAN Manager uses network device drivers (software that coordinates between
 the computer's software and hardware) to operate the network adapter card(s)
 in the computer: network adapter card drivers (also known as media access
 control drivers) control the physical function of the network adapter cards,
 and protocol drivers control the card drivers. Standard LAN Manager software
 includes many network device drivers to work with many brands of network
 adapter cards.

 You can also install network device drivers not supplied with LAN Manager if
 the network device driver is on a disk prepared for LAN Manager
 installation. Importing the driver means using the Setup program to transfer
 the driver software from its separate disk to the computer's LANMAN.DOS
 directory, where the driver is then treated as any other LAN Manager driver.

 If you are unsure about the network device drivers for your computer, do not
 import additional drivers now; you can import drivers later using the Import
 command from the Actions menu. For more information about network device
 drivers, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 To import additional network device drivers:


   1.  Insert a network device driver disk and choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears, displaying the network drivers
       available for import:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Network adapter cards" list box, select the card drivers you
       want to import.

   3.  In the "Protocols" list box, select the protocols you want to import.

   4.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   5.  If you have another network driver disk, choose <Yes> and return to
       the beginning of this procedure.

       If you are done importing network device drivers, choose <No>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       A series of dialog boxes appear in which you define the primary
       parameters for the workstation.



 Defining Primary Parameters

 Primary parameters determine how the workstation operates. Many parameters
 have an equivalent entry in the LANMAN.INI file. Entry names used in the
 LANMAN.INI file are noted. For more information about LANMAN.INI, see the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference.


 Primary Parameters Dialog Box

 The "Primary Parameters" dialog box specifies the name and other essential
 settings for the computer:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To define the primary parameters:


   1.  In the "Computername" text box (computername in LANMAN.INI), type a
       computername for this workstation.

       The computername is the name by which users connect to and send
       messages to this server. The computername can have as many as 15
       characters, including letters, numbers, and the following characters:


       ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ ` { } ~

       Each computername must be unique on the local-area network or any
       other network to which this network is connected.

       For a LAN Manager Basic workstation, the "Username" and "Domain" text
       boxes cannot be changed.

   2.  To have LAN Manager start automatically whenever the computer is
       started, select "Yes" from the "Autostart at boot time" option
       buttons.

   3.  Type the amount of memory, in kilobytes, in the computer (1 megabyte =
       1024 kilobytes).

       This value affects LAN Manager's memory usage. Memory usage is
       controlled by various entries in the LANMAN.INI file.

   4.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The "Network Drivers" dialog box appears.



 Network Drivers Dialog Box

 The "Network Drivers" dialog box specifies which network device drivers are
 installed in this computer. Network device drivers include network adapter
 card drivers and protocols (which communicate between LAN Manager and the
 network adapter cards).

 You can have one network adapter card with one protocol. If there is more
 than one protocol available and you are not sure which protocol to select,
 consult your administrator or see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device
 Driver Guide.

 The "Network Drivers" dialog box looks like this:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To install network device drivers:


   1.  In the "Network adapter cards" list box, select the network adapter
       card in the computer.

   2.  Choose >.

       The network adapter card is added to the top of the "Network
       configuration" list box.

       If only one protocol is available, it is automatically selected to
       work with this card. Skip to step 6.

       If the network adapter card driver is monolithic (it includes its own
       protocol), the word "Monolithic" appears next to it. Skip to step 6.

   3.  If more than one protocol is available in the "Protocols" list box,
       select the protocol to be used with this driver.

   4.  Choose <Add protocol>.

       The protocol appears in the "Network configuration" list box.

   5.  To delete the network adapter card from the "Network configuration"
       list box, select the card and choose > (or press ALT+R).

       NOTE  Hardware settings for the network adapter card are included in
       the PROTOCOL.INI file. If these settings are incorrect or incomplete,
       the system will not operate correctly. You may need to adjust the
       CONFIG.SYS, LANMAN.INI, and PROTOCOL.INI files. For more information,
       see the Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide and the
       manufacturer's documentation for the network adapter card.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

   7.  If the computer already uses a memory manager or has an 8086/88
       microprocessor, continue with the "Completing the Installation"
       section.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The "Memory Managers" dialog box appears.



 Memory Managers Dialog Box

 The HIMEM.DOS extended memory manager uses 64K of the computer's extended
 memory (memory beyond the 1-megabyte limit) to run parts of the LAN Manager
 workstation software. This leaves more memory below the 1-megabyte limit for
 other applications.

 If you have a 286 or 386 microprocessor, more than 64K of extended memory,
 and no extended memory manager installed, LAN Manager can install the
 HIMEM.DOS memory manager.

 The "Memory Managers" dialog box looks like this:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To install the extended memory manager:


   1.  Select "Yes" for "Use extended memory manager."

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The final installation dialog box appears.



 Completing the Installation

 The final installation dialog box lets you complete the installation
 process:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To complete the installation:


   1.  If you are not done installing LAN Manager (you want to make further
       changes), choose <No>.

       The main screen is displayed. For more information, see Chapter 6,
       "Managing the Configuration."

       If you are done with the installation, choose <Yes>.

       Setup saves the current configuration and exits the program.

   2.  When the MS-DOS prompt appears, restart the computer. For details, see
       your MS-DOS manual(s).


 This computer is now installed as a workstation.

 To view or modify the installation configuration, see Chapter 6, "Managing
 the Configuration."

 For more information about using an MS-DOS workstation, see the Microsoft
 LAN Manager User's Guide for MS-DOS.






 Chapter 6  Managing the Configuration
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The Setup program lets you view and change any portion of an existing LAN
 Manager configuration. This capability provides an easy way to fine-tune the
 system or make changes to the configuration such as adding a network adapter
 card or transport drivers. Many changes require that you restart the
 computer after saving the changes.

 Begin changing the configuration by restarting the Setup program as
 described in Chapter 1, "Overview."

 Two menus are used for configuration management: the Actions menu and the
 Options Menu.


 Actions Menu

 With the Actions menu, you can view or change the primary parameters
 established during installation, import additional network device drivers,
 detach LAN Manager from the MS OS/2 operating system (for upgrading MS
 OS/2), and remove LAN Manager. Chapter 7, "Removing an Installation,"
 discusses detaching or removing LAN Manager.


 Viewing or Changing Primary Parameters

 You can view or change the parameters set during installation.

 To view the primary parameters or change a field:


   1.  From the Actions menu, choose View/modify.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The first of a series of dialog boxes containing parameters you set
       during installation is displayed.

   2.  Make changes as needed.

   3.  Exit each dialog box in one of the following ways:

       ş   To make changes and view the next available dialog box, choose
           <OK>.

       ş   To make changes and exit to the main screen, choose <Done> (or
           press ALT+D).

       ş   To return to the previous screen without making any changes,
           choose <Cancel> (or press ESC).




 Importing Additional Network Device Drivers

 You can install network device drivers not originally supplied with LAN
 Manager if the network device driver is on a disk prepared for LAN Manager
 installation.

 For more information about network device drivers, see the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

 To import additional network device drivers:


   1.  From the Actions menu, choose Import.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       A dialog box appears, displaying the drive to contain the network
       driver disk.

   2.  To use a different drive, type the drive letter.

   3.  Choose <OK>.

   4.  Insert a network driver disk and choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears, displaying the network drivers
       available for import:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   5.  In the "Network adapter cards" list box, select the card drivers you
       want to import.

   6.  In the "Protocols" list box, select the protocols you want to import.

   7.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   8.  If you have another network driver disk, choose <Yes> and return to
       the beginning of this procedure.

       If you are done importing network device drivers, choose <No>.

   9.  Install the network device drivers using the View/modify command from
       the Actions menu, and follow the procedure in the "Viewing or Changing
       Primary Parameters" section, earlier in this chapter.



 The Options Menu

 With the Options menu, you can easily modify most configurable options
 stored in the LANMAN.INI file. Many of these parameters will rarely (if
 ever) require modification. Before adjusting these parameters, you should be
 quite familiar with LAN Manager operations.

 When you select the Options menu, only menu commands that apply to the
 current configuration are available. In the same way, only applicable dialog
 boxes appear, and only applicable options can be changed. For example, if
 the current configuration is a Basic workstation for MS-DOS, neither Server
 nor Services is available from the Options menu. On the other hand, if the
 current configuration is an MS OS/2 workstation running the Peer service,
 some server parameters are available.

 When you choose Server, Workstation, or Services from the Options menu, the
 first of a series of dialog boxes appears. To make changes to a field in a
 dialog box, type over the existing response. In some cases, you select
 choices in a list box, select an option button, or mark or unmark a check
 box.

 Exit each dialog box in one of the following ways:


   ş   To implement the changes and view the next available dialog box,
       choose <OK> (or press ENTER).

   ş   To implement the changes and exit to the main screen, choose <Done>
       (or press ALT+D).

   ş   To exit to the previous screen without implementing any changes,
       choose <Cancel> (or press ESC).


 Entry names used in the LANMAN.INI file are noted in the description of the
 related field. For more information about LANMAN.INI entries, see the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference.

 The following sections describe how to view or change server, workstation,
 and other service parameters.


 Viewing or Changing Server Parameters

 To view or change server parameters:


   1.  From the Options menu, choose Server.

       The first of three dialog boxes appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box has the following fields:


     Administrative alert destination (alertnames in LANMAN.INI)
       Lists usernames to receive administrative alerts. Separate names with
       commas.

     Monitor rate (alertsched in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets how often the server checks for alert conditions and sends any
       needed alert messages. The range is 0-65535 (forever); the default is
       5 minutes.

     Access trigger (accessalert in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of resource access violations that can occur between
       alert checks ("Monitor rate") before the server sends an alert
       message. The range is 0-65535; the default is 5 violations.

     Minimum disk space trigger (diskalert in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the minimum amount of free disk space that the server allows
       before sending an alert message. The range is 0-65535; the default is
       300 kilobytes.

     Error trigger (erroralert in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of errors that can occur between alert checks before
       the server sends an alert message. The range is 0-65535; the default
       is 5 errors.

     Logon trigger (logonalert in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of logon violations that can occur between alert
       checks before the server sends an alert message. The range is 0-65535;
       the default is 5 violations.

     LAN I/O trigger (netioalert in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of network I/O errors that can occur between alert
       checks before the server sends an alert message. The range is 0-65535;
       the default is 5 errors.

     Auto-load at server start (autoprofile in LANMAN.INI)
       Determines whether the server automatically loads the profile when it
       starts up. The default is "Yes."

     Auto-save at server stop (autoprofile in LANMAN.INI)
       Determines whether the server automatically saves the profile when it
       stops. The default is "No."

     Auto-load/save path (autopath in LANMAN.INI)
       Specifies the location of the automatic server profile. This can be an
       absolute pathname (beginning with a drive letter) or a pathname
       relative to the LANMAN\PROFILES directory. The default is SRVAUTO.PRO.

     Announce rate (srvannounce in LANMAN.INI)
       Specifies how often any nonhidden server announces its presence on the
       network. The range is 0-65535; the default is 60 seconds.

     Announce delta time (srvanndelta in LANMAN.INI)
       Specifies the amount of time the server uses to vary its announce
       rate. The range is 0-65535; the default is 3000 milliseconds.


   1.  Make changes as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box has the following fields:


     Maximum audit log size (maxauditlog in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum size of the audit log file. The range is 0-65535; the
       default is 100 kilobytes.

     Items to audit (auditing in LANMAN.INI)
       Specifies which events the server will audit:


   ş   "All items" selects all auditable events.

   ş   "Service state changes" audits changes to LAN Manager services (such
       as starting or stopping the server).

   ş   "Successful session logons" audits successful workstation session
       connections to the server.

   ş   "Session log on denials" audits unsuccessful attempts by workstations
       to connect to the server.

   ş   "Successful network logons" audits successful logons to the local-area
       network.

   ş   "Network logon denials" is reserved for future versions of LAN
       Manager.

   ş   "Successful shares" audits all successful uses of resources.

   ş   "Failed share attempts" audits all unsuccessful attempts to use a
       shared resource.

   ş   "Accounts database changes" audits changes to the user accounts
       database.

   ş   "ACL database changes" audits changes to an access control list
       (permissions for a resource).

   ş   "Resource accesses" audits all attempts to connect to a resource.

   ş   "Logon limit violations" audits attempts to log on to the network
       outside of valid logon time.


     Maximum number of devices (maxchdevs in LANMAN.INI)
       Specifies how many communication devices the server can share on the
       network. The range is 0-16; the default is 2 devices.

     Maximum number of queues (maxchdevq in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of shared communication-device queues. The
       range is 0-65535; the default is 2 queues.

     Maximum number of job requests (maxchdevjob in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of requests that the server can accept for all
       communication-device queues combined. The range is 0-65535; the
       default is 6 requests.

     FAT cache memory
       Specifies the amount of memory allocated for the file allocation table
       (FAT) disk cache range; the default is 256 kilobytes. This is the
       value of the diskcache line in CONFIG.SYS.

     HPFS cache memory
       Specifies the amount of memory allocated for the high-performance file
       system (HPFS) disk cache. This is the value of the /cache option of
       the ifs=hpfs386 line in CONFIG.SYS.


   1.  Make changes as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box has the following fields:


     Maximum connections to server (maxconnections in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of connections (resource uses) workstations
       can have to the server. The range is the value of "Maximum users"
       (maxusers) to 2000; the default is 128 connections.

       The Setup program adjusts this value automatically depending on the
       amount of system memory and the values of "Dedicated server" and
       "Maximum users." To change "Dedicated server" and "Maximum users," see
       the "Viewing or Changing Primary Parameters" section, earlier in this
       chapter.

     Maximum file locks (maxlocks in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of file locks for the server files. This entry
       applies only to networks that include MS-DOS workstations. The range
       is 1-8000; the default is 64 file locks.

     Maximum file searches (maxsearches in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of file searches the server can do simultaneously. The
       range is 0-1927; the default is 50 file searches.

     Maximum open resources (maxopens in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of open files, pipes, and devices the server
       can have at one time. The range is 1-8000; the default is 64 open
       resources.

     Maximum opens per workstation (maxsessopens in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of files, pipes, and devices a workstation can
       have open at the server. The range is 1 to the number set for "Maximum
       open resources"; the default is 50 open resources.

     Maximum session requests/workstation (maxsessreqs in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of resource requests a workstation can have
       open at the server. The range is 1-65535; the default is 50 requests.

     Maximum shares for this server (maxshares in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of resources the server can share with the
       network. The range is 2-500; the default is 16 resources.

     Maximum concurrent administrators (numadmin in LANMAN.INI)
       Specifies the maximum number of users who can work simultaneously as
       administrators on the server. The range is 0-65535; the default is 2
       users.

     Number of request handlers (numfiletasks in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of processes designated to handle file and print
       requests from workstations. The range is 1-8; the default is 1
       process.

     Number of large-transfer buffers (numbigbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of large buffers that the server uses for moving large
       files or amounts of data on FAT partitions. If the server has only
       HPFS386 partitions, set the value to 3. The range is 0-80; the default
       is 3 buffers.

       The Setup program adjusts this value automatically depending on the
       amount of system memory and the values of "Dedicated server" and
       "Maximum users" (maxusers). To change "Dedicated server" and "Maximum
       users," see the "Viewing or Changing Primary Parameters" section,
       earlier in this chapter.

     Number of request buffers (numreqbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of buffers the server uses to take requests from
       workstations. The range is 5-300; the default is 15 buffers.

       The Setup program adjusts this value automatically depending on the
       amount of system memory and the values of "Dedicated server" and
       "Maximum users" (maxusers). To change "Dedicated server" and "Maximum
       users," see the "Viewing or Changing Primary Parameters" section,
       earlier in this chapter.

     Request buffer size (sizreqbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the size of the buffers that the server uses to take requests
       from workstations. The range is 1024-32768; the default is 4096 bytes.



   1.  Make changes as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The main Setup Screen appears.



 Viewing or Changing Workstation Parameters

 The workstation parameters dialog boxes you receive depend on whether the
 workstation is an MS OS/2 or MS-DOS workstation.


 MS OS/2 Workstation Parameters

 To view or change parameters for an MS OS/2 workstation:


   1.  From the Options menu, choose Workstation.

       The first of two dialog boxes appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box has the following fields:


     Maximum NetBIOS commands (maxcmds in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of NetBIOS commands that the workstation
       software can simultaneously send to the network adapter card(s). The
       range is 5-255 (per network adapter card); the default is 16 commands.
       The recommended value is 1.6 times the value specified for "Maximum
       execution threads" (maxthreads).

       If you change this entry, you must restart the computer to make the
       change effective.

     Maximum execution threads (maxthreads in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of execution threads that can use the network
       by means of the Workstation service. The range is 10-254; the default
       is 10 threads.

       If you change this entry, you must restart the computer to make the
       change effective.

     Maximum tasks waiting on alerts (numalerts in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of program tasks that can be waiting on an alert
       condition. The range is 3-200; the default is 12 tasks.

     Maximum services allowed (numservices in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of services LAN Manager can run simultaneously. The
       range is 4-256; the default is 8 services. This number should be less
       than or equal to the number of entries in the [services] section of
       the LANMAN.INI file.

     Print request time (printbuftime in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the amount of time after which DOS session print requests will
       print. The range is 0-65535 (forever); the default is 90 seconds.

     Session timeout (sesstimeout in LANMAN.INI)
       Specifies the time that the workstation waits before disconnecting a
       session from a server that no longer responds. The range is 10-65535
       (forever); the default is 45 seconds.

     Screen refresh time (refresh in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the rate at which the information in LAN Manager Screen dialog
       boxes is updated on the screen. The range is 0-65535; the default is
       15 seconds.

     Inactive share connect time (keepconn in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the amount of time that a workstation maintains an inactive
       connection to a shared resource. The range is 1-65535 (forever); the
       default is 600 seconds.

     Inactive file search time (keepsearch in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the amount of time that the workstation maintains an inactive
       file search request. The range is 1-65535 (forever); the default is
       600 seconds.

     Perform nonguaranteed mailslot delivery (mailslots in LANMAN.INI)
       Specifies whether this workstation will receive alert messages from
       servers. Mark or unmark this box by pressing the SPACEBAR.


   1.  Make changes as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box has the following fields:


     Character block size (charcount in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of outgoing characters that the workstation stores in
       a buffer before sending them to a communication-device queue. The
       range is 0-65535; the default is 16 bytes.

     Character collection time (chartime in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the amount of time that the workstation collects data before
       sending the information to a shared communication-device queue. The
       range is 0-65535000 (forever); the default is 250 milliseconds.

     Device wait time (charwait in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the amount of time that the workstation waits for a requested
       shared communication device to become available. The range is 0-65535;
       the default is 3600 seconds.

     Maximum disk error log size (maxerrorlog in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum size of the error log to prevent the error log from
       filling up a hard disk. The range is 2 kilobytes to the size of the
       disk; the default is 100 kilobytes.

       If you change this entry, you must restart the computer to make the
       change effective.

     Internal error buffer size (sizerror in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the size of the internal error buffer. The range is 256-4096; the
       default is 1024 bytes.

     Large-transfer buffer size (maxwrkcache in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the size limit of the workstation large-transfer buffers. The
       range is 0-640 kilobytes in 64-kilobyte increments; the default is 64
       kilobytes. An odd value is rounded up to the next 64 kilobytes.

       If you change this entry, you must restart the computer to make the
       change effective.

     Number of data buffers (numworkbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of buffers that a workstation can use to store data
       for transmission. The range is 3-50; the default is 15 buffers.

     Data buffer size (sizworkbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the size of workstation buffers. The range is 1024-16384; the
       default is 4096 bytes.

     Number of char device buffers (numcharbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of pipe and device buffers. The range is 0-15; the
       default is 10 buffers. The valid range depends on the communication
       device.

     Character device buffer size (sizcharbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the size of character and device buffers. The range is 64-4096;
       the default is 512 bytes.

     Number of datagram buffers (numdgrambuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of buffers allocated for processing incoming
       datagrams. The range is 8-112; the default is 14 buffers.


   1.  Make changes as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The main Setup Screen appears.



 MS-DOS Workstation Parameters

 To view or change parameters for an MS-DOS workstation:


   1.  From the Options menu, choose Workstation.

       The first of three dialog boxes appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box has the following fields:


     Maximum NetBIOS commands (maxcmds in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of NetBIOS commands that the workstation
       software can simultaneously send to the network adapter card(s). The
       range is 5-255 (per network adapter card); the default is 11 commands.

       If you change this entry, you must restart the computer to make the
       change effective.

     Maximum services allowed (numservices in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of services LAN Manager can run simultaneously. The
       range is 1-255; the default is 5 services. This number should be less
       than or equal to the number of entries in the [services] section of
       the LANMAN.INI file.

     Number of mail slots (nummailslots in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of mailslots available on the workstation. The range
       is 0-255; the default is 2 mailslots.

     Number of resources (numresources in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of connections to shared resources that the
       workstation can have at a time. The range is 1-255; the default is 9
       connections.

     Number of servers (numservers in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the maximum number of servers to which the workstation can have
       active connections simultaneously. The range is 1-255; the default is
       9 servers.

     Number of viewed servers (numviewedservers in LANMAN.INI)
       Specifies the number of servers that can be viewed with the net view
       command and the LAN Manager Screen. The range is 0-255; the default is
       50 servers.

     Inactive share connect time (keepconn in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the amount of time that a workstation maintains an inactive
       connection to a shared resource. The range is 1-65535 (forever); the
       default is 600 seconds.

     Inactive file search time (keepsearch in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the amount of time that the workstation maintains an inactive
       file search request. The range is 1-65535 (forever); the default is
       600 seconds.


   1.  Make changes as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box has the following fields:


     Character block size (charcount in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of incoming characters the server stores in a buffer
       before sending them to a communication-device queue. The range is
       0-65535; the default is 16 bytes.

     Character collection time (chartime in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the amount of time that the workstation collects data before
       sending the information to a shared communication-device queue. The
       range is 0-65535000 (forever); the default is 250 milliseconds. The
       valid range depends on the communication device.

     Device wait time (charwait in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the amount of time that the workstation waits for a requested
       shared communication device to become available. The range is 0-65535;
       the default is 128 seconds. The valid range depends on the device.

     Number of data buffers (numworkbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of buffers that a workstation can use to store data
       for transmission. The range is 3-50; the default is 5 buffers.

     Data buffer size (sizworkbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the size of workstation buffers. The range is 64-4096; the
       default is 1024 bytes.

     Number of device buffers (numcharbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of pipe and device buffers. The range is 0-15; the
       default is 2 buffers.

     Character device buffer size (sizcharbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the size of character and device buffers. The range is 64-4096;
       the default is 128 bytes.

     Number of datagram buffers (numdgrambuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of buffers allocated for processing incoming
       datagrams. The range is 3-112; the default is 3 buffers.

     Number of big buffers (numbigbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the number of big buffers the workstation uses to receive large
       files or large amounts of data from servers. The range is 0-255; the
       default is 0 buffers.

     Big buffer size (sizbigbuf in LANMAN.INI)
       Sets the size of big buffers. The range is 0-65535; the default is
       4096 bytes.


   1.  Make changes as needed.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       LAN Manager has two optional layers of functions: nonguaranteed
       mailslots (mailslots in LANMAN.INI) and application program interfaces
       (APIs) (keepapis in LANMAN.INI). Adding these functions increases LAN
       Manager's memory usage and provides the following features:


     Add mailslot functions only
       Lets the workstation view servers with the net view command and
       receive broadcast messages from other computers.

     Add mailslot and API functions
       Adds the ability to run the LAN Manager Screen and other network
       application programs. This option is selected by default.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If you choose "Don't add any extra LAN MANAGER functions" the LAN Manager
 Screen and various other LAN Manager commands will not work.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


   1.  Select one of the options.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The main Setup Screen appears.



 Viewing or Changing Service Parameters

 To view or change parameters for LAN Manager services:


   1.  From the Options menu, choose Services.

       The "Services Parameters" dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Select the service you want to change.

   3.  Choose <Zoom>

       The appropriate dialog box appears.

   4.  Make changes as needed.

       (Not all parameters are available for modification on workstations.)

   5.  Choose <OK>.

       The "Services Parameters" dialog box appears.

   6.  Make changes to other services as needed.

   7.  To return to the main screen, choose <OK> from the "Services
       Parameters" dialog box.


 The following sections describe the parameters for each service.


 Alerter

 The Alerter service sends administrative alerts over the network and is
 available only to servers. The Alerter entry is as follows:

 Alert buffer size (sizalertbuf in LANMAN.INI)
   Sets the size of the buffer used for administrative alerts. The range is
   512-16384; the default is 3072 bytes.


 Messenger

 The Messenger service lets you send and receive messages on the local-area
 network. Messenger entries are as follows:

 Message log file name (logfile in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies a name for this computer's message log file. The name must
   include the .LOG extension. The default filename is MESSAGES.LOG.

 Message buffer size (sizmessbuf in LANMAN.INI)
   Sets the amount of buffer space allocated for sending and receiving
   messages. The range is 512-62000; the default is 4096 bytes. (For MS-DOS,
   the range is 128-62000; the default is 256 bytes.)


 Netlogon

 The Netlogon service implements logon security and is available only to
 servers. Netlogon entries are as follows:

 Pulse time (pulse in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the interval between sending update notices when no updates are
   occurring. The range is 60-3600; the default is 300 seconds.

 Randomize time (randomize in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the time interval value that the primary domain controller sends
   to the member servers. The range is 5-120; the default is 30 seconds.

 Logon scripts path (scripts in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies a pathname for the Netlogon script files. This can be an
   absolute path (beginning with a drive letter) or a path relative to the
   LANMAN directory. The default is REPL\IMPORT\SCRIPTS.

 Synchronize with primary at startup (update in LANMAN.INI)
   Synchronizes the user accounts database with the primary domain controller
   at service startup time. This box is marked by default.


 Netrun

 The Netrun service lets a user at a workstation run a program on a server.
 This service is available only to servers and MS OS/2 workstations running
 the Peer service. Netrun entries are as follows:

 Maximum simultaneous Netrun requests (maxruns in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the maximum number of net run requests that can run
   simultaneously. The range is 1-10; the default is 3 requests.

 Server Netrun path (runpath in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the path containing a list of directories that contain programs
   available for use with net run.


 Replicator

 The Replicator service maintains identical copies of selected directories
 and files on several servers simultaneously. This service is available only
 to servers and MS OS/2 workstations running the Peer service. Replicator
 entries are as follows:

 Operating mode (replicate in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies whether this server is to be an export server, import server, or
   both.

 Namelist (Export) (exportlist in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies which import servers and domains receive update notices. The
   range is 0-32 computernames, separated by semicolons.

 Path (Export) (exportpath in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the export directory. This can be an absolute path (beginning
   with a drive letter) or a path relative to the LANMAN directory. The
   default is REPL\EXPORT.

 Monitor rate (interval in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies how often the subdirectories and files in the export directory
   are checked to determine if there are any changes to replicate. The range
   is 1-60; the default is 5 minutes.

 Pulse rate (pulse in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies how often the export server sends redundant update signals (not
   triggered by changes) to import servers. The range is 1 to 10 times the
   "Monitor rate" (interval); the default is 3 times the "Monitor rate."

 Guard time (guardtime in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies how long an export directory must be stable (without changes)
   before the contents can be copied by import servers. The range is 0
   minutes to one half of the "Monitor rate" (interval); the default is 2
   minutes.

 Randomize time (random in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the random number of seconds over which to distribute the
   connections to import servers. The range is 1-120; the default is 60
   seconds.

 Namelist (Import) (importlist in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the export servers. The range is 0-32 computernames, separated
   by semicolons.

 Path (Import) (importpath in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the import directory where the import duplicates will be kept.
   This can be an absolute path (beginning with a drive letter) or a path
   relative to the LANMAN directory. The default is REPL\IMPORT.

 Perform updates with user logged on (tryuser in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies whether the import server should try to automatically connect
   when another user is logged on locally. The default is "Yes."

 Logon username (logon in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the username that the import server uses to connect to the
   export server when no one is logged on locally. The default is "USER."

 Logon password (password in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the password that the import server uses to connect to the
   export server when no one is logged on locally. The default is an asterisk
   (*), which causes the user to be prompted for a password.


 UPS

 The UPS (uninterruptible power supply) service sends warning messages to
 users when a power failure occurs and initiates an orderly shutdown. This
 service is available only to servers and MS OS/2 workstations running the
 Peer service. UPS entries are as follows:

 Shutdown command file (cmdfile in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the .CMD batch program to be run before the server shuts down.
   This entry is optional. The default is not to run a file.

 Message delay time (messdelay in LANMAN.INI)
   Sets the number of seconds between initial power failure and the first
   message sent to a user. The range is 0-120; the default is 5 seconds.

 Time between messages to users (messtime in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the number of seconds between messages sent to users notifying
   them of a power failure. The range is 30-300; the default is 120 seconds.

 Runtime before shutdown (batterytime in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the number of seconds the server can run by battery before the
   UPS service initiates shutdown. This entry is optional and is relevant
   only if the low battery signal is unavailable. The range is 0-28800; the
   default is 60 seconds.

 Recharge time/minute of runtime (recharge in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the number of minutes of recharge time required for each minute
   of battery runtime. This entry is optional. The range is 5-250; the
   default is 100 minutes.

 Available signals (signals in LANMAN.INI)
   Specifies the signals that are available from the battery:

     Line failure (input)
       Indicates that the battery can signal the UPS service upon power
       failure. This signal corresponds to the CTS (Clear to Send) cable
       signal.

     Low battery (input)
       Indicates that the battery can signal the UPS service when it has less
       than two minutes of power remaining. This signal corresponds to the
       DCD (Carrier Detect) cable signal.

     Inverter shutdown (output)
       Indicates that the battery can accept a signal from the UPS service
       telling it to shut off. This signal corresponds to the DTR (Data
       Terminal Ready) cable signal.

 Signal polarity (voltlevels in LANMAN.INI)
   Indicates the polarity of the available signals.


 Completing the Configuration

 To save changes made to the configuration:


   1.  From the Actions menu, choose Save.

       A message box appears, stating that the configuration is being saved.

   2.  From the Exit menu, choose Exit.

   3.  For an MS OS/2 computer, use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager Shutdown
       command to prepare the computer for restarting.

   4.  Restart the computer by pressing CTRL+ALT+DEL.


 For more information about fine-tuning and changing your configuration, see
 the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference.






 Chapter 7  Removing an Installation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 You may need to remove LAN Manager software to upgrade to a newer version or
 to upgrade the MS OS/2 operating system.

 This chapter presents three ways to remove LAN Manager:


   ş   Removing LAN Manager entirely. This procedure removes all LAN Manager
       files and the LAN Manager directory. Lines added to the system files
       during installation are also removed. This lets you upgrade LAN
       Manager to a new version.

   ş   Detaching LAN Manager from the MS OS/2 operating system. This is
       necessary only when upgrading the MS OS/2 operating system on a server
       with HPFS386. The LAN Manager files and the LAN Manager directory
       remain intact; the Setup program simply removes lines added to the
       system files (including OS2.INI and OS2SYS.INI) during installation.

   ş   Removing the LAN Manager HPFS386 file system driver. Do this only if
       you need to use the MS OS/2 1.2 HPFS file system driver.



 Saving Files

 If you are removing LAN Manager, you may want to save files for reference.
 Copy them to another directory (or to a removable disk) before removing the
 installation. You don't need to save files when detaching LAN Manager. For
 example, you might want to save


   ş   Profiles in the LANMAN\PROFILES directory.

   ş   Third-party network device drivers (not originally provided with LAN
       Manager) in the LANMAN\DRIVERS directory.

   ş   Error logs, message logs, and audit trails in the LANMAN\LOGS
       directory of a server.

   ş   LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\NET.ACC, the user accounts database file of a server.
       To copy this file, use backacc or copy the file while LAN Manager is
       not running. For more information about backacc, see the Microsoft LAN
       Manager Administrator's Reference.

   ş   Home directories and scripts in the LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS directory
       of a server.

   ş   All contents of the LANMAN\REPL\EXPORT directory of a server.

   ş   Remoteboot configuration and user directories under LANMAN\RPL and
       LANMAN\RPLUSER on a server.



 Removing LAN Manager

 Removing LAN Manager removes LAN Manager files and directories, and lines
 from the system files (including OS2.INI and OS2SYS.INI). This lets you
 install a new version of LAN Manager.

 To remove LAN Manager software from a computer:


   1.  Restart the Setup program as described in Chapter 1, "Overview."

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

   2.  From the Actions menu, choose Remove.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  Choose <Yes>.

   4.  When the operating system prompt appears, restart the computer.

       For MS OS/2, use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager Shutdown command.



 Detaching LAN Manager

 Detaching LAN Manager removes lines from the system files (including OS2.INI
 and OS2SYS.INI) and removes permissions from all directories and files. This
 is necessary to upgrade (or apply software updates to) the MS OS/2 operating
 system on a server with HPFS386 partitions because the MS OS/2 HPFS file
 system driver cannot access files with LAN Manager permissions assigned.

 To detach LAN Manager from the MS OS/2 operating system:


   1.  Restart the Setup program as described in Chapter 1, "Overview."

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

   2.  From the Actions menu, choose Detach.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  Choose <Yes>.

   4.  From the Actions menu, choose Save.

       A message box appears, stating that the configuration is being saved.

   5.  From the Exit menu, choose Exit.

   6.  When the MS OS/2 prompt appears, use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager
       Shutdown command to restart the computer.

       For details, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).


 You can now upgrade the MS OS/2 operating system. See the following section
 to reattach LAN Manager.


 Attaching LAN Manager

 After using the Setup program's Detach command and upgrading the MS OS/2
 operating system, use the Attach command to restore LAN Manager software.

 To reattach LAN Manager to the MS OS/2 operating system:


   1.  Restart the Setup program as described in Chapter 1, "Overview."

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

   2.  From the Actions menu, choose Attach.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  Choose <Yes>.

   4.  From the Actions menu, choose Save.

       A message box appears, stating that the configuration is being saved.

   5.  From the Exit menu, choose Exit.

   6.  If the Setup program reported any errors while attaching LAN Manager,
       read the LANMAN\ACLERR.LOG file for descriptions of the errors. You
       can delete the ACLERR.LOG file after reading it.

   7.  When the MS OS/2 prompt appears, use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager
       Shutdown command to restart the computer.

       For details, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).



 Removing HPFS386

 LAN Manager converts MS OS/2 1.2 HPFS partitions to HPFS386 partitions.
 HPFS386 stores permissions for files and directories in the file system
 itself for improved LAN Manager performance. Because the method of storing
 the files is different, the MS OS/2 1.2 HPFS file system driver cannot
 access HPFS386 files with permissions assigned.

 To access HPFS386 files using the MS OS/2 1.2 HPFS driver, you have two
 choices:


   ş   Remove all directory and file permissions. The MS OS/2 1.2 HPFS driver
       can now read all files on the partition, though it is still an HPFS386
       partition.

   ş   Remove directory and file permissions, then remove the HPFS386 file
       system driver, replacing it with the MS OS/2 1.2 HPFS driver.



 Removing HPFS386 File Permissions

 To remove all directory and file permissions on an HPFS386 partition:


   1.  From the Accounts menu on the LAN Manager Screen, choose File
       permissions.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Filename" text box, type the root directory of the HPFS386
       partition (such as C:\).

   3.  Choose >.

   4.  Choose <Done>.



 Removing the HPFS386 File System Driver

 To remove the HPFS386 file system driver, replacing it with the MS OS/2 1.2
 HPFS driver:


   1.  Remove all file permissions on the HPFS386 partition, as described in
       the previous procedure.

   2.  Edit the CONFIG.SYS file, making the following changes:

       ş   Remove the ifs=hpfs386.ifs line.

       ş   Remove the run=cache.exe line.

       ş   Insert the following line in place of the ifs=hpfs386 line:

           ifs=c:\os2\hpfs.ifs /cache:xx /autocheck:yy

           where xx is the desired size of the HPFS cache and yy is the drive
           letters of HPFS partitions.


   3.  Use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager Shutdown command to restart the
       computer.

       For details, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).






 Chapter 8  Upgrading from an Earlier LAN Manager Version
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The following list outlines the steps you will take to upgrade from an
 earlier LAN Manager version (1.x) to LAN Manager version 2.0:


   ş   Save selected files, including the user accounts database, in a
       separate location to be restored or reviewed later.

   ş   Remove the old version of LAN Manager.

   ş   If necessary, upgrade the operating system. This may include upgrading
       to the MS OS/2 high-performance file system (HPFS).

   ş   Install LAN Manager 2.0 with the Setup program.

   ş   Restore the saved files.

   ş   Convert and reinstall the previous user accounts database and resource
       permissions.


 The following sections describe each step in detail.


 Saving Files

 There are two reasons to save files from LAN Manager 1.x: restoring and
 reviewing. You will return some files to the LAN Manager 2.0 software
 directory. Other files you will save for reference only, as a reminder of
 how you set up LAN Manager 1.x.

 Copy the files to a location outside the LANMAN directory (whatever its
 pathname on the computer, usually C:\LANMAN or C:\LANMAN.DOS).

 If you'll be upgrading the operating system in a way that erases data on the
 hard disk (such as reformatting for the HPFS file system), save the files on
 a floppy disk or other removable medium.

 To save LAN Manager 1.x files for later use:


   1.  Stop LAN Manager software by typing

       net stop workstation

   2.  Copy the following files, to be restored after the upgrade (pathnames
       are relative to the LANMAN directory):


     PROFILES\*.PRO
       LAN Manager profiles.

     LOGS\MESSAGES.LOG
       Messages received by the computer.

     LOGS\SCHED.LOG
       The list of time-delayed commands used by the LAN Manager at utility
       on a server.

     DRIVERS\(third-party driver subdirectories)
       Network device drivers supplied by a third party (not originally
       supplied with LAN Manager).

     ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS\*.* (including subdirectories)
       Home directories and scripts for a server that runs the Netlogon
       service (logon security that validates users' logon requests).

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Do not save the default logon script,
 ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS\SCRIPTS\NETLOGON.CMD. This file is replaced with a new 2.0
 version.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


   1.  Copy the following files, to be used for reference after the upgrade
       (pathnames are relative to the LANMAN directory):


     ACCOUNTS\NET.ACC
       The user accounts database (and permissions database for resources)
       for a server.

     LOGS\NET.AUD
       The audit trail for a server.

     LANMAN.INI
       The LAN Manager initialization file. You must use the 2.0 version of
       LANMAN.INI, but you may want to refer to the earlier file.

     DRIVERS\PROTOCOL.INI
       The configuration file for LAN Manager device drivers. LAN Manager 2.0
       creates a new PROTOCOL.INI file at installation, but you may want to
       refer to earlier modifications to device driver options.

     C:\CONFIG.SYS
       The system configuration file. LAN Manager 2.0 makes appropriate
       modifications to CONFIG.SYS, but you may want to refer to earlier
       modifications not covered by the Setup program. For example, if the
       computer's network adapter card is not in the Setup program's list,
       you must modify CONFIG.SYS manually as described in the Microsoft LAN
       Manager Network Device Driver Guide.

       The Setup program creates a backup copy of CONFIG.SYS during
       installation, but if you upgrade the operating system, you lose the
       LAN Manager 1.x modifications.


 Removing LAN Manager 1.x

 Use the LAN Manager 1.x Setup program to remove LAN Manager 1.x:


   1.  Be sure that you are not in the LANMAN directory or any of its
       subdirectories in any of your MS OS/2 sessions.

       If you are, you will not be able to remove the directories.

   2.  Start the LAN Manager 1.x Setup program by typing

       netsetup

       If the Setup program does not start, put the LAN Manager 1.x
       Workstation Disk 1 or Server Disk 1 in drive A and type

       a:\netsetup

   3.  Choose menu command 4, "Remove LAN Manager software."

       You will see the following question:

       WARNING:  Doing this will remove the directory [pathname] and its
       contents.
       In addition, this will delete lines from the following files:

       [list of system files]

       Are you sure you want to do this (Y/N)? [N]:

   4.  Type Y.

       When the LAN Manager software has been removed, the Setup main menu
       appears.

   5.  Choose menu command 5, "Quit the Setup program."


 If the removal fails, system files (CONFIG.SYS, AUTOEXEC.BAT, STARTUP.CMD,
 and OS2INIT.CMD) may still contain LAN Manager commands that interfere with
 installing LAN Manager 2.0. You will need to remove these LAN Manager
 commands manually from the files.

 In CONFIG.SYS, remove


   ş   lanroot\netprog from the path line, where lanroot is the pathname of
       the LANMAN directory

   ş   lanroot\netlib from the libpath line

   ş   The device=fastopen.sys line, if it exists

   ş   Any device lines near the end of the file with the LANMAN directory in
       the pathnames


 In the remaining files, remove any commands relating to LAN Manager.


 Upgrading to a New Operating System Version

 Chapter 1, "Overview," describes system requirements, including operating
 system versions, for LAN Manager 2.0. A server or an MS OS/2 workstation
 running the Peer service must have MS OS/2 1.2. Other installations may not
 require an operating system upgrade.

 For instructions on upgrading the operating system, see the system
 documentation.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 When upgrading MS OS/2, the MS OS/2 installation utility may offer to save
 some MS OS/2 settings from the previous configuration. The "Save list and
 preferences" dialog box appears if MS OS/2 had a previously defined Desktop
 Manager group, program list, or set of Presentation Manager preferences. Do
 not save the previous settings, as this can cause complications with
 installation of print spooling software.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 When you upgrade to MS OS/2 1.2, you can install the high-performance file
 system (HPFS). If you do so on a 386 computer, installing LAN Manager 2.0
 automatically converts HPFS disk partitions to HPFS386, a version of HPFS
 optimized for network performance. If you want to install local security on
 a server (under which users working at the server are subject to LAN Manager
 security), you must install HPFS on the hard disk's boot partition. For more
 information about HPFS386 and local security, see the Microsoft LAN Manager
 Administrator's Guide.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Installing HPFS replaces data on the hard disk because the process involves
 reformatting the drive. Be sure to save important files or directories
 before beginning the installation.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 If the upgrade involves reformatting the drive, restore all backed-up files
 to the drive before continuing. A later procedure involves converting the
 user accounts database and permissions from LAN Manager 1.x, and permissions
 will be restored to files only if you have copied the files back onto the
 drive.

 For information about upgrading MS OS/2 after installing LAN Manager, see
 Chapter 7, "Removing an Installation."


 Installing LAN Manager 2.0

 To install LAN Manager 2.0, turn to the chapter appropriate for the computer
 you are updating:


   ş   Chapter 2, "Installing a Server"

   ş   Chapter 3, "Installing an MS OS/2 Workstation"

   ş   Chapter 4, "Installing LAN Manager Enhanced on an MS-DOS Workstation"

   ş   Chapter 5, "Installing LAN Manager Basic on an MS-DOS Workstation"


 Follow the instructions for installing LAN Manager. Return to this chapter
 when you finish.


 Restoring Files

 To restore files that you saved from the previous LAN Manager version:


   1.  If you installed HPFS386 with local security, you need to log on with
       administrative privilege before you can write files to the hard disk.
       To log on with the default administrative account name and password,
       type

       net logon admin password

   2.  Copy saved profiles (*.PRO) to the LANMAN\PROFILES directory.

   3.  Copy the message log (MESSAGES.LOG) to the LANMAN\LOGS directory.

   4.  Copy the log for the LAN Manager at utility (SCHED.LOG) to the
       LANMAN\LOGS directory of a server.

   5.  Copy third-party network device drivers to the LANMAN\DRIVERS
       directory.

   6.  If the computer is a server that will run the Netlogon service, copy
       users' home directories to the LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS directory.

   7.  If the computer is a server that will run the Netlogon service, copy
       logon scripts to the appropriate locations:

       ş   LANMAN\REPL\IMPORT\SCRIPTS for users who will run LAN Manager 2.0

       ş   LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\USERDIRS\SCRIPTS for users who will run LAN
           Manager 1.x




 Converting the User Accounts Database

 This section applies only to servers with user-level security.

 It is assumed that you have followed all procedures in this chapter to
 install LAN Manager and have done the following:


   ş   Saved a copy of the LAN Manager 1.x LANMAN\ACCOUNTS\NET.ACC file.

   ş   If you upgraded any disk partitions to HPFS386, restored all backed-up
       directories and files to the partitions.


 Converting the LAN Manager 1.x user accounts database has two effects:


   ş   You won't need to recreate the user accounts database.

       LAN Manager 2.0 offers a domainwide security feature, where one server
       in a domain maintains a user accounts database and the other servers
       use copies of that database. Therefore, you only need to convert the
       database if the server will be a primary domain controller
       (maintaining the user accounts database for a domain) or a standalone
       server (maintaining its own database and not participating in
       domainwide security). For more information about domainwide security,
       see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.

   ş   The server retains permissions for server resources. With LAN Manager
       1.x, permissions were stored in the NET.ACC file with the user
       accounts database. Converting the database also converts the
       permissions established for files, directories, printer queues,
       communication-device queues, and other resources.

       Permissions for disk resources (files and directories) on an HPFS386
       partition are stored in the file system itself. The procedure in this
       section converts the old permissions and installs them into the file
       system.

       For a non-HPFS386 partition, the permissions remain in NET.ACC.


 To convert a LAN Manager 1.x user accounts database and permissions to the
 LAN Manager 2.0 format:


   1.  Start the LAN Manager Workstation service by typing

       net start workstation

   2.  Log on, using the default LAN Manager 2.0 administrative account, by
       typing

       net logon admin password

       If you have already changed the password for the admin account, use
       the new password.

   3.  Convert the LAN Manager 1.x user accounts database by typing

       portacc pathname

       where pathname is the pathname of the LAN Manager 1.x NET.ACC file.
       For example, if the NET.ACC file is on a backup floppy disk, saved as
       part of an A:\LANMAN directory, type

       portacc a:\lanman\accounts\net.acc


 If you installed HPFS386 with local security, the Setup program established
 some file permissions on the C drive. The portacc command doesn't change
 these permissions; if the LAN Manager 1.x database specified permissions for
 those same files, the 1.x permissions are ignored.

 When a user account or group exists in the 2.0 database and in the 1.x
 database, the 2.0 user account or group remains; the 1.x user account or
 group is ignored. For example, if the 1.x database had an admin account, it
 does not overwrite the 2.0 admin account.

 You may want to adjust the converted user accounts since LAN Manager 2.0 has
 user account settings not present in LAN Manager 1.x. Settings that are new
 for LAN Manager 2.0 have the default values for all converted accounts. For
 more information about user accounts, see the Microsoft LAN Manager
 Administrator's Guide.





 Appendix A  Setting Up the Fault-Tolerance System
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Included with Microsoft LAN Manager is a full-screen Ftsetup utility for
 configuring disk fault tolerance. The LAN Manager fault-tolerance system
 minimizes the possibility of data loss due to a hard disk or disk controller
 malfunction. The Ftsetup utility provides three fault-tolerance features:
 fault monitoring, drive mirroring, and drive duplexing.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If the computer already has a fault-tolerance system provided by the
 manufacturer, you do not need to use Ftsetup.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Fault monitoring monitors hard disks for errors. Any errors detected are
 recorded in a log and reported to the user by the Alerter service. When you
 run Ftsetup, fault monitoring is automatically implemented for all hard
 disks on the computer. For details about the Alerter service parameters, see
 Chapter 6, "Managing the Configuration."

 Drive mirroring requires at least two hard disks and HPFS partitions.
 Ftsetup can mirror partitions that are currently FAT partitions,
 reformatting them as HPFS partitions. The CONFIG.SYS file must include an
 ifs=hpfs.ifs or ifs=hpfs386.ifs line to start the HPFS installable file
 system. For more information about HPFS and the ifs=hpfs.ifs line in
 CONFIG.SYS, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).

 When you mirror a primary partition (a logical drive), a secondary partition
 (mirror) is created on a separate hard disk (physical drive). All changes
 written to the primary partition are written to the secondary partition
 simultaneously. In this way you can keep exact duplicates of as many as 11
 logical drives.

 Drive duplexing is like drive mirroring except that the parallel partitions
 are on hard disks with separate hard disk controllers providing protection
 against a faulty controller. If Ftsetup detects two controllers when you
 mirror drives, it automatically performs duplexing.

 Secondary partitions are not visible to the operating system, and you do not
 access them directly. If a hard disk fails, you can expose the related
 mirrored drives to the operating system and access the duplicate partitions
 directly. For details, see the "Managing Mirrored Drives" section, later in
 this chapter.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 CAUTION

 Drive mirroring formats the partitions to be mirrored and partitions to be
 used as mirrored drives. Before mirroring drives, be sure to back up any
 data on those partitions.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Before starting Ftsetup, administrators should read about the
 fault-tolerance system in the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.


 Starting Ftsetup

 To start Ftsetup:


   1.  Type

       ftsetup

       A dialog box appears, indicating that either this system supports only
       fault monitoring or that this system supports both fault monitoring
       and drive mirroring.

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       Lines are added to the CONFIG.SYS file to implement fault monitoring.

       To implement drive mirroring at this time, see the following section.

   3.  If the system does not support drive mirroring or if you do not want
       to implement drive mirroring, from the Exit menu, choose Exit (or
       press F3).

   4.  If prompted to, restart the computer by pressing CTRL+ALT+DEL.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 CAUTION


 Do not turn off the computer's power while Ftsetup is running. This can
 leave the CONFIG.SYS file in an unstable state.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ





 Drive Mirroring

 To set up drive mirroring or drive duplexing, the server must have more than
 one hard disk, the HPFS installable file system installed, and fault
 monitoring installed.

 To mirror drives:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Mirror drive(s).

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box displays drives available for mirroring.

   2.  Select a drive to be mirrored by positioning the cursor on the drive
       and pressing the SPACEBAR or by clicking it with the mouse.

   3.  Choose <OK>.

       If you do not want to continue with mirroring, choose <Cancel> (or
       press ESC).

       The main screen appears.

   4.  From the Exit menu, choose Exit (or press F3).

       A message box appears, indicating that you must restart the computer.

   5.  To exit the dialog box, choose <Cancel> (or press ESC).

   6.  Use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager Shutdown command to prepare the
       computer for restarting.

   7.  Restart the computer by pressing CTRL+ALT+DEL.

       The computer restarts and automatically restarts Ftsetup. The
       following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box displays the logical drives that will now be
       formatted. Partitions that will become mirrored drives are also
       formatted but are not shown.

   8.  Choose <OK>.

       When formatting is complete, a dialog box appears asking for a volume
       label. Providing a volume label is optional.

   9.  To assign a volume label to the logical drive, type a volume label in
       the text box and choose <OK>.

      To exit the dialog box without assigning a volume label, choose
      <Cancel>. The default volume label will be the name of the drive.

   10. To exit Ftsetup, from the Exit menu, choose Exit.

      A dialog box appears, indicating that you must restart the computer.

   11. Use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager Shutdown command to prepare the
       computer for restarting.

   12. Restart the computer by pressing CTRL+ALT+DEL.



 Managing Mirrored Drives

 In addition to setting up drive mirroring or drive duplexing, you can
 perform the following tasks with commands on the Config menu:


   ş   Viewing the configuration of partitions

   ş   Canceling mirroring of partitions

   ş   Deleting partitions

   ş   Exposing orphaned mirrors

   ş   Removing the fault-tolerance system



 Viewing Partitions

 The View drive status command lets you view the configuration of all the
 partitions on the computer and their current mirror status.

 To examine this display:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose View drive status.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box has the following fields:


     DRIVE
       Specifies the drive letter of each partition. Mirrored partitions do
       not receive a drive letter and are indicated with the @ symbol.

     VOLUME
       Indicates the volume label that you assigned for each partition.

     TYPE
       Specifies the type of partition. Types can be FAT, HPFS, MIRROR,
       XENIX(R), or NOVELL(R).

     DISK
       Indicates with a hexadecimal number the hard disk on which the
       partition resides.

     CYL
       Specifies the starting cylinder for each partition.

     SIZE
       Specifies the size, in megabytes, of each partition.

     STATUS
       Specifies the mirror status of each partition as follows:


   ş   "Mirrored" indicates that the partition has a mirrored partition on
       another hard disk.

   ş   "Not mirrored" indicates that the partition does not have a mirrored
       partition on another hard disk but is capable of being mirrored.

   ş   "Cannot mirror" indicates that the partition is not capable of being
       mirrored because it is a boot partition.

   ş   "Pending mirror" indicates that the partition has been selected for
       mirroring, but mirroring will not be complete until the computer is
       restarted and Ftsetup formats the partition. See the "Drive Mirroring"
       section, earlier in this chapter.

   ş   "Pending unmirror" indicates the partition is selected for
       unmirroring, but the process will not be complete until the computer
       is restarted and Ftsetup formats the partition. See the following
       section, "Canceling Mirroring."

   ş   "Orphaned mirror" indicates that the partition is a mirror partition
       and that the original partition that it mirrors is no longer
       available. See the "Exposing Orphaned Mirrors" section, later in this
       chapter.


     Total disk space available
       Specifies the total amount of unused storage space on the hard disks.

     Largest disk space available for mirroring
       Specifies the largest amount of contiguous unused disk space that can
       be used for mirroring drives.


   1.  To exit the dialog box and return to the main screen, choose <Cancel>.

       You can exit Ftsetup now or continue to use other Config menu
       commands.

   2.  To exit Ftsetup, from the Exit menu, choose Exit.



 Canceling Mirroring

 The Unmirror drive(s) command lets you cancel mirroring of partitions that
 you specify. After unmirroring, the mirror partition becomes visible to the
 operating system and receives the next available drive letter.

 To unmirror partitions:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Unmirror drive(s).

       The following dialog box appears, displaying the drives available for
       unmirroring:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Select a drive to be unmirrored.

   3.  Choose <OK>.

       If you do not want to continue with unmirroring, choose <Cancel> (or
       press ESC).

       The main screen appears. The current status of the partitions that you
       selected for unmirroring is "Pending unmirror."

   4.  To exit Ftsetup, from the Exit menu, choose Exit.

       A dialog box appears, indicating that you must restart the computer.

   5.  Use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager Shutdown command to prepare the
       computer for restarting.

   6.  Restart the computer by pressing CTRL+ALT+DEL.



 Deleting Partitions

 The Delete drive(s) command lets you delete partitions except for drive C,
 mirrored drives, and drives that are pending mirroring.

 To delete partitions:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Delete drive(s).

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box displays partitions available for deletion.

   2.  Select a partition to delete.

   3.  Choose <OK>.

       The main screen appears. The partitions will be deleted after you exit
       Ftsetup and restart the computer.

   4.  To exit Ftsetup, from the Exit menu, choose Exit.

       A dialog box appears, indicating that you must restart the computer.

   5.  Use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager Shutdown command to prepare the
       computer for restarting.

   6.  Restart the computer by pressing CTRL+ALT+DEL.



 Exposing Orphaned Mirrors

 When a primary partition becomes detached from its mirrored drive or
 partition, the status of the secondary partition is "Orphaned mirror." You
 can use the Expose orphaned drive(s) command to make the orphaned mirrored
 partition visible to the operating system as a logical drive. The next
 available drive letter is assigned to the exposed partition. Once exposed,
 you can access the information on the partition and, if you want, create a
 mirror for the partition.

 To access the information on the partition:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Expose orphaned drive(s).

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box displays the orphaned mirrored partitions.

   2.  Select a partition to expose to the operating system.

   3.  Choose <OK>.

       The main screen appears. The selected partitions will be accessible
       after you exit Ftsetup and restart the computer.

   4.  To exit Ftsetup, from the Exit menu, choose Exit.

       A dialog box appears, indicating that you must restart the computer.

   5.  To exit the dialog box, choose <Cancel>.

   6.  Use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager Shutdown command to prepare the
       computer for restarting.

   7.  Restart the computer by pressing CTRL+ALT+DEL.



 Removing the Fault-Tolerance System

 The Remove the fault tolerance system command lets you unmirror all mirrored
 and pending mirroring drives. Mirror partitions and orphaned mirrors are
 then deleted, and fault-tolerance information is removed from the CONFIG.SYS
 file.

 To unmirror all mirrored drives:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Remove the fault tolerance system.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Choose <OK>.

       The main screen appears. The process will be complete after you exit
       Ftsetup and restart the computer.

   3.  From the Exit menu, choose Exit.

       A dialog box appears, indicating that you must restart the computer.

   4.  To exit the dialog box, choose <Cancel>.

   5.  Use the MS OS/2 Presentation Manager Shutdown command to prepare the
       computer for restarting.

   6.  Restart the computer by pressing CTRL+ALT+DEL.








 Appendix B  The LIM 4.0 Expanded Memory Manager
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The EMM386.DOS is an installable device driver that allows MS-DOS programs
 on 80386-based computers to emulate expanded memory (memory beyond the
 conventional memory limit of 640K) in extended memory (memory from 1
 megabyte [10,245K] to 16 megabytes [16,384K]). This driver supports the
 Lotus/Intel/Microsoft (LIM) 4.0 Expanded Memory Specification.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If you are already using an expanded memory manager with Microsoft Windows,
 do not install the EMM386.DOS driver.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To use EMM386.DOS with your computer, you need


   ş   An 80386-based computer

   ş   64K or more of extended memory

   ş   MS-DOS version 3.1 or later


 The EMM386.DOS device driver was being revised as this manual went to press.
 See the LANMAN.DOS\DOCUPDAT\INSTALL.TXT file for updated information about
 using this device driver.






 Appendix C  Setting Up the Remoteboot Service
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 When you boot a computer, the operating system is loaded into memory. With
 LAN Manager, workstations can be booted over the network by servers running
 the Remoteboot service. When the workstation is turned on, it broadcasts a
 boot request, and a designated server responds by sending back boot
 software. This process is known as remoteboot, or remote program load (RPL).

 For remoteboot, workstations must have a Token-Ring network adapter card
 with the RPL ROM chip installed.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The server's MS OS/2 license does not extend to other computers. You must
 have one valid MS-DOS or MS OS/2 license for each remoteboot workstation.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 With the Remoteboot service, administrators can


   ş   Enhance network security by using workstations that run only the
       software an administrator makes available and that have no disk drives
       that can be used to copy data

   ş   Update system software for workstations without changing files at each
       workstation

   ş   Centralize disk resources, maintaining a few large server hard disks
       instead of many smaller workstation hard disks


 This appendix explains how to install the Remoteboot service on the server,
 set up the first remoteboot workstation, and troubleshoot the Remoteboot
 service. The Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide explains how to set
 up additional workstations and customize the Remoteboot service.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The LANMAN directory in the following procedures may have another pathname
 on the server; this is set during installation. The default is C:\LANMAN.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Memory Requirements

 Before you begin, be sure your server has enough disk space for the files
 needed by both the server and the remote workstations:


   ş   If you are booting only MS-DOS workstations, you will need 20
       megabytes of disk space, plus space for work directories.

   ş   If you are booting only MS OS/2 workstations, you'll need 30.5
       megabytes of disk space, plus space for a work directory for the first
       workstation. For each additional MS OS/2 workstation, plan on using an
       additional 5.5 megabytes, plus space for a work directory.

   ş   If you are booting both MS-DOS and MS OS/2 workstations, you'll need
       35 megabytes of disk space for the first workstation.  For additional
       workstations, plan on space for a work directory for each workstation,
       plus 5.5 megabytes for each MS OS/2 workstation.



 How the Remoteboot Service Works

 The Setup program can configure the server to boot MS-DOS version 4.01, MS
 OS/2 version 1.2, or both. The boot process can be changed to boot MS-DOS
 versions 3.20, 3.30, and 3.31. For information about how to do this, see the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The Remoteboot service does not support MS-DOS version 3.11 and IBM DOS
 version 4.00.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The Remoteboot service uses different programs to boot the two operating
 systems.

 For MS-DOS, the administrator must create a boot image file. This file acts
 as a boot disk for workstations. All MS-DOS workstations that boot from the
 same image file boot the same configuration. Users cannot change the
 workstation's configuration. An administrator can create different boot
 image files for different configurations.

 For MS OS/2, the administrator creates a configuration for each workstation.
 Optionally, the administrator can allow users to modify the workstations'
 configurations.

 When the Remoteboot service is installed, the Setup program copies a RPL
 directory to the server. The RPL directory, shown in Figure C.1, contains
 all software that the Remoteboot service uses to boot workstations remotely.
 (Figure C.1 shows subdirectories installed by Setup as well as
 subdirectories you create in configuring the Remoteboot service.)

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The DOS, LANMAN.DOS, and DOSxxx directories are for MS-DOS. The FITS,
 MACHINES, LANMAN, and OS2 directories are for MS OS/2. The COMPUTRX
 directories represent configuration directories for users of MS OS/2
 workstations that were booted remotely. The RPL directory is assumed to be
 relative to the LANMAN directory.

 Administrators create a RPLUSER directory, shown in Figure C.2, to contain
 work directories for workstations that boot remotely. The work directories
 give users work space for creating, changing, and deleting files and
 directories. The RPLUSER directory is assumed to be relative to the LANMAN
 directory.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 A LAN Manager profile, RPL.PRO, shares the RPL directory tree as RPLFILES
 and the RPLUSER directory tree as WRKFILES. For booting MS-DOS workstations,
 RPL.PRO also shares the LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory as IMAGES.


 Preparing a Server

 This section describes how to prepare a server to run the Remoteboot
 service. If you want more than one server running the Remoteboot service to
 distribute the load of supporting workstations, install the first server,
 then see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.

 Preparing the server involves


   ş   Installing LAN Manager on the server, choosing Setup options related
       to the Remoteboot service

   ş   Editing the server's CONFIG.SYS file

   ş   Installing files as needed in the server's operating system
       directories (C:\ and C:\OS2)

   ş   Setting up the LANMAN\RPL and LANMAN\RPLUSER directories

   ş   Creating a MS-DOS boot image file (if the server is to boot MS-DOS)

   ş   Assigning permissions for remoteboot resources

   ş   Creating records in the RPL.MAP file
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The LANMAN directory in the following procedures may have another pathname
 on the server; the parameter is set during installation. The default is
 C:\LANMAN.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 If you are installing the Remoteboot service for MS-DOS workstations, you
 will need a floppy disk containing MS-DOS system files. (Use the MS-DOS
 format /s command to create the disk.)


 Installing LAN Manager with Remoteboot Options

 The Setup program offers several options related to the Remoteboot service.
 The following procedure assumes that the server is already installed, but
 you can specify these same options during installation.

 To select Remoteboot options with the Setup program:


   1.  Start the Setup program as described in Chapter 1, "Overview."

   2.  From the Actions menu, choose View/modify.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The first of a series of dialog boxes appears, containing parameters
       that you set during installation. You don't need to make any changes
       to this dialog box.

   3.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The "Network configuration" list box lists the computer's network
       adapter cards, including at least one Token-Ring card.

   4.  In the "Network configuration" list box, select a Token-Ring network
       adapter card.

   5.  In the "Protocols" list box, select the Remoteboot protocol.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

       If full help is selected, a help screen appears. After reading the
       help screen, choose <OK>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   7.  In the "Services to autostart" list box, select "Remoteboot."

   8.  Choose <Done>.

   9.  To record the changes you've made, from the Actions menu, choose Save.

   10. From the Exit menu, choose Exit.



 Editing the CONFIG.SYS File

 To use the Remoteboot service, you must adjust the server's CONFIG.SYS file.


 Make the following changes to the CONFIG.SYS file:


   1.  Add the following line, anywhere in the file:

       set tmp=c:\tmp
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Be sure the TMP directory exists on drive C. If not, create


   2.  In the libpath line, add lanman\drivers\protocol\rpl at the beginning
       of the path.

   3.  If there is a device=c:\os2\com0x.sys line anywhere in the file (where
       x is any character), move it to the line before the
       device=lanman\netprog\rdrhelp.sys line.



 Installing Operating System Files

 You must install some operating system files if the server uses Micro
 Channel architecture (MCA) and it supports non-MCA workstations with MS
 OS/2, or if the server is a non-MCA computer and it supports MCA
 workstations with MS OS/2.

 If the server and workstations are all of the same architecture type or if
 the server supports only MS-DOS workstations, go to the following section.

 To support workstations of a different architecture:


   1.  Copy the following files from the MS OS/2 installation disks to the
       C:\ directory:

       ş   ABIOS.SYS

       ş   F*.BIO

       ş   BASEDD01.SYS

       ş   BASEDD02.SYS


   2.  Copy the following files from the MS OS/2 installation disks to the
       C:\OS2 directory:

       ş   COM01.SYS

       ş   COM02.SYS




 Setting Up the LANMAN\RPL and LANMAN\RPLUSER Directories

 The LANMAN\RPL directory contains files for operating the Remoteboot service
 and operating system files for remoteboot users. An associated directory,
 LANMAN\RPLUSER, contains working directories for each remoteboot user. The
 Setup program installs many of the necessary files; you need to install the
 rest with the following procedures.

 There are two procedures: one to support MS OS/2 workstations and one to
 support MS-DOS workstations. If the server supports both MS OS/2 and MS-DOS
 workstations, complete both procedures.

 In the following procedures, you will copy large directory trees. The
 procedures show you how to do this using the MS OS/2 xcopy command. You can
 use another directory copying utility if you prefer.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The Remoteboot service, by default, supports MS-DOS version 4.01
 workstations. The Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide explains how
 to adapt the Remoteboot service to support MS-DOS 3.20 and 3.3x versions.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Setting Up for MS OS/2 Workstations

 To set up the LANMAN\RPL and LANMAN\RPLUSER directories for MS OS/2
 workstations:


   1.  Use  xcopy to copy the C:\OS2 directory to LANMAN\RPL\OS2.

       The file SWAPPER.DAT may not copy successfully. This is okay.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If OS2.INI and OS2SYS.INI did not copy to LANMAN\RPL\OS2, use the
 Presentation Manager Shutdown command to stop the operating system and
 reboot your computer from a floppy disk. Then copy these two files from
 C:\OS2 to
 C:\LANMAN\RPL\OS2.ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


   2.  Copy the following files from C:\ to LANMAN\RPL\OS2:

       ş   AUTOEXEC.BAT

       ş   ABIOS.SYS

       ş   F*.BIO (if this file exists)

       ş   BASEDD*.SYS (if this file exists)

       ş   KBD01.SYS (if this file exists)


   3.  Copy the following hidden files from C:\ to LANMAN\RPL\OS2:

       ş   OS2LDR

       ş   OS2KRNL

           Use the MS OS/2 File Manager to display, then copy, these files.


   4.  Copy the following files from LANMAN\NETPROG to LANMAN\RPL\OS2:

       ş   DISK01.SYS

       ş   DISK02.SYS


   5.  Create the directory LANMAN\RPL\OS2.

   6.  Copy the following files from the MS OS/2 installation disks to
       LANMAN\RPL\OS2:

       ş   BVHCGA.DLL

       ş   BVHEGA.DLL

       ş   BVHVGA.DLL

       ş   IBMCGA.DLL

       ş   IBMEGA.DLL

       ş   IBMVGA.DLL

           If the files are in packed format on the MS OS/2 installation
           disks (the filename ends in @), use the MS OS/2 unpack utility
           after copying them. To unpack the files, type the following for
           each file:

           unpack filename


   7.  Copy the following files from LANMAN\RPL\OS2 to
       LANMAN\RPLUSER\DEFAULT\OS2:

       ş   OS2.INI

       ş   OS2SYS.INI


   8.  A default CONFIG.SYS file for the workstations exists in
       LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\DEFAULT. Edit this file as needed for the
       workstations. For example, be sure that all necessary device drivers
       are loaded.

   9.  Edit the LANMAN\RPL\FITS\DEFAULT.FIT file to change all occurrences of
       RPLSERVR to the server's computername.

   10. Create a LANMAN\RPL\LANMAN directory.

   11. Stop the Workstation service.

   12. Copy the entire LANMAN directory (including LANMAN.INI) to
       LANMAN\RPL\LANMAN, with the exception of the RPL and RPLUSER
       subdirectories.

      To avoid copy problems, do not use a single xcopy command (or
      equivalent); copy each LANMAN subdirectory individually.

      Or, if you have sufficient disk space, use xcopy to copy the entire
      LANMAN directory to a temporary directory. Delete the RPL and RPLUSER
      directories and their contents. Next, use xcopy to move the contents of
      the temporary directory to LANMAN\RPL\LANMAN. Then delete the temporary
      directory and its contents.

   13. If any remoteboot workstation will run the Peer service, copy the
       LANMAN\ACCOUNTS subdirectory to
       LANMAN\RPLUSER\DEFAULT\LANMAN\ACCOUNTS.

   14. If any remoteboot workstation will run the Replicator service, copy
       the LANMAN\REPL subdirectory to LANMAN\RPLUSER\DEFAULT\LANMAN\REPL.
       You may want to remove the LANMAN\RPLUSER\DEFAULT\LANMAN\REPL\EXPORT
       subdirectory.



 Setting Up for MS-DOS Workstations

 To set up the LANMAN\RPL directory for MS-DOS workstations:


   1.  Create LANMAN\RPL\LANMAN.DOS and LANMAN\RPL\DOS401 directories.

   2.  Use xcopy to copy the LAN Manager for MS-DOS installation disks to
       LANMAN\RPL\LANMAN.DOS.

   3.  Edit the LANMAN\RPL\LANMAN.DOS\LANMAN.INI file, typing the server's
       domain name for the domain entry (in the [workstation] section).

   4.  Use xcopy to copy the files from the MS-DOS 4.01 installation disks to
       the LANMAN\RPL\DOS401 directory.



 Creating an MS-DOS Boot Image File

 For servers that boot MS-DOS 4.01 workstations, you must create a boot image
 file. The remoteboot server can be configured to boot other versions of
 MS-DOS (see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide).

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Any time that you change the CONFIG.SYS, AUTOEXEC.BAT, or LANMAN.INI files
 in LANMAN\RPL\DOS, you must run the makeimg utility to build a new image
 file.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To create a boot image file for MS-DOS 4.01 on a server:


   1.  Change directories to the LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory.

   2.  Put a blank, system-formatted disk for MS-DOS version 4.01 in the
       server's A drive.

       (Use the MS-DOS format /s command to create this. Do not format the
       disk on a computer running MS OS/2.)

   3.  Use the LAN Manager makeimg utility to create the boot image file
       DOS401.IMG in the LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory by typing (from that
       directory)

       makeimg dos401

       The software assumes drive A; the image file is given the extension
       .IMG.



 Sharing Remoteboot Resources

 Remoteboot workstations need access to three resources on the server. These
 resources are automatically shared when you load the RPL.PRO profile:


   ş   The LANMAN\RPL directory (shared as RPLFILES)

   ş   The LANMAN\RPLUSER directory (shared as WRKFILES)

   ş   The LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory (shared as IMAGES)


 To use the Remoteboot service, workstations must be able to connect to the
 RPLFILES shared resource. MS-DOS workstations must have access to the IMAGES
 shared resource. After a workstation boots, users must be able to connect to
 the WRKFILES shared resource to access their work directories.


 The RPL.PRO Profile

 RPL.PRO, a profile located in LANMAN\PROFILES, automatically sets
 share-level permissions for, and shares, resources needed to remoteboot
 workstations. If the server has user-level security, you must set resource
 permissions separately. (The next section explains how to do this.)

 RPL.PRO contains these lines:

   net share rplfiles=c:\lanman\rpl /remark:"" /permissions:"rx" /unlimited

   net share wrkfiles=c:\lanman\rpluser /remark:"" /permissions:"rwcxda"
    /unlimited

   net share images=c:\lanman\rpl\dos /remark:"" /permissions:"rx" /unlimited

 Use a text editor to add a remark about each resource.

 To share the remoteboot resources, type

   net load rpl

 If the server has user-level security, assign permissions as described in
 the next section.


 User-Level Permissions

 On a server with user-level security, the simplest way to provide access to
 remoteboot resources is through a group.

 To grant permissions for remoteboot resources on a server with user-level
 security:


   1.  Be sure the server is started and that you are logged on with admin
       privilege.

   2.  Change the minimum password length to zero by typing

       net accounts /minpwlen:0

       A new remoteboot workstation has no password.

   3.  Create the group rpl by typing

       net group rpl /add

   4.  Create a user account called default, and add it to the rpl group by
       typing

       net user default /add /passwordreq:no /workstations:default

       net group rpl default /add

       This is a default account for booting the workstation. The net user
       options specify that no password is required and that the user account
       can only be used at a workstation named \\DEFAULT.

   5.  Assign the default account RWCDXA (Read, Write, Create, Delete,
       Execute, and Change Attribute) permissions for the
       LANMAN\RPLUSER\DEFAULT directory by typing

       net access c:\lanman\rpluser\default /add default:RWCDXA

       If the LANMAN directory is somewhere other than C:\LANMAN, type the
       correct pathname.

       Repeat this step for each subdirectory of LANMAN\RPLUSER\DEFAULT, or
       use the <Permit> and <Permit tree> commands in the administrator's LAN
       Manager Screen to establish inherited permissions (see the Microsoft
       LAN Manager Administrator's Guide).

   6.  Assign the default account RX (Read and Execute) permissions for the
       LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\DEFAULT directory, and specify that the
       permissions are to be inherited.

   7.  To support MS OS/2 workstations, assign the rpl group RX permissions
       for the OS2 and LANMAN subdirectories of the RPL directory, and
       specify that these permissions are to be inherited.

   8.  To support MS-DOS workstations, assign the rpl group RX permissions
       for the DOS, LANMAN.DOS, and DOS401 subdirectories of the RPL
       directory, and specify that these permissions are to be inherited.



 Viewing Records in the RPL.MAP File

 The RPL.MAP file coordinates the operation of the Remoteboot service on the
 server. Every server running the Remoteboot service must have a RPL.MAP file
 in the LANMAN\RPL directory. The RPL.MAP file consists of server records and
 workstation records.

 Server records contain information about the operating systems that the
 server provides. Workstation records contain information about the
 workstations to be booted remotely. Each server and workstation record
 contains 14 fields separated by spaces. Spaces within fields and blank
 fields are represented by a tilde (~).


 Server Records

 The Setup program copies the RPL.MAP file to the server with two server
 records: one for MS OS/2 version 1.2 and one for MS-DOS version 4.01 (the
 default operating system for the Remoteboot service).

 Figure C.3 shows the default server records for MS-DOS and MS OS/2.

   yyyyyyyyyyyy dosbb.cnf 3 6 N IMAGES DOS~WITH~NETBEUI ~ ~ ,,, ~ R_DOS ~ ~
   yyyyyyyyyyyy os2bb.cnf 3 6 N ~      OS2~WITH~NETBEUI ~ ~ ,,, ~ D_OS2 ~ ~

 Figure C.3 RPL.MAP default server records for MS-DOS and MS OS/2

 The fields in a server record have the following meanings:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 1                                 Should contain 12 Ys. If this field
 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 1                                 Should contain 12 Ys. If this field
                                   contains 12 Xs, see the PCLP User's Guide,
                                   available from IBM Corporation, for
                                   information about the correct values for
                                   the record's other fields.

 2                                 Specifies the pathname for the boot block
                                   configuration file. This file contains
                                   information about network device drivers,
                                   the boot block processor, and the loader
                                   that accesses the boot image file for
                                   MS-DOS workstations. The pathname is
                                   relative to the LANMAN\RPL directory.

 3                                 Tells how many boot requests from a
                                   workstation with no record in the RPL.MAP
                                   file will trigger a boot using a copy of
                                   the default workstation record.
                                   (Workstations with records boot on the
 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  (Workstations with records boot on the
                                   first request.) To trigger a default boot,
                                   the requests must arrive within the
                                   interval specified by field 4. The range
                                   is 0-1000; the default is 3 requests.

 4                                 Tells the interval (in seconds) during
                                   which the boot requests specified by field
                                   3 must be received before the default boot
                                   configuration is used. The range is
                                   0-1000; the default is 6 seconds.

                                   For example, if field 3 is 5 and field 4
                                   is 200, then workstations without records
                                   boot from the default record after their
                                   fifth boot request within any 200-second
                                   period.

 5                                 Specifies whether the server waits for a
 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
5                                 Specifies whether the server waits for a
                                   SEND.FILE.REQUEST frame. The values are N
                                   and A; the default is N.

                                   If this field has the value N, the server
                                   sends the boot block frames one after
                                   another without waiting for the
                                   SEND.FILE.REQUEST frames. Using N
                                   decreases traffic on the network and
                                   speeds up the boot process. If this field
                                   has the value A, the remote workstation
                                   must transmit a SEND.FILE.REQUEST frame to
                                   receive each frame of the boot block from
                                   the server.

 6                                 For MS-DOS records, this field tells the
                                   sharename of the MS-DOS boot image file
                                   (the default is IMAGES). For MS OS/2
                                   records, it must contain a tilde (~).
 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  records, it must contain a tilde (~).

 7                                 Is an optional comment field for the
                                   administrator's use.

 8-9                               Reserved (always ~).

 10                                Reserved (always ,).

 11                                Reserved (always ~).

 12                                Tells whether the record is enabled or
                                   disabled, and identifies which operating
                                   system the record describes. The record is
                                   enabled if the field begins with R (the
                                   default setting) and disabled if it begins
                                   with D.

 13-14                             Reserved (always ~).
 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
13-14                             Reserved (always ~).

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Workstation Records

 The Setup program copies the RPL.MAP file to the remoteboot server with two
 workstation records: one for MS OS/2 and one for MS-DOS. Because they have
 the same name (DEFAULT), only one can be enabled at a given time. By
 default, the MS OS/2 record is disabled and the MS-DOS record is enabled.
 These originals can be copied to make unique boot records for each remote
 workstation.

 Figure C.4 shows the default workstation records for MS-DOS and MS OS/2.

   ???????????? DEFAULT ~ DOS401       RPLSERVR ~ ~ ~ ~ ,,, Z R_DOS ~ ~
   ???????????? DEFAULT ~ FITS\DEFAULT RPLSERVR ~ ~ ~ ~ ,,, ~ D_OS2 ~ ~

 Figure C.4 RPL.MAP default workstation records for MS-DOS and MS OS/2

 The fields in a workstation record have the following meanings:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 1                                 Tells the workstation's 12-character,
                                   hexadecimal adapter ID number. The adapter
                                   ID is the serial number for the
                                   workstation's network adapter card. The
                                   default record contains 12 question marks.


 2                                 Specifies the workstation's computername.
                                   The default is DEFAULT.

 3                                 Reserved.

 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 4                                 For MS-DOS records, specifies the boot
                                   image file to be used. The default is
                                   DOS401.

                                   For MS OS/2 records, tells the .FIT file
                                   (file index table) for the workstation.
                                   The default is FITS\DEFAULT.

 5                                 Specifies the computername of the server
                                   handling the workstation's boot requests.
                                   The default is RPLSERVR. You should change
                                   this to the computername of the boot
                                   server.

 6-9                               Reserved (always ~).

 10                                Reserved (always ,).

 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 11                                For MS-DOS records, the field specifies
                                   the last logical drive letter available.
                                   The default is Z. For MS OS/2 records, the
                                   field must contain a tilde (~).

 12                                Tells whether the workstation record is
                                   enabled or disabled, and identifies the
                                   workstation's operating system. The first
                                   letter of the field indicates whether the
                                   record is enabled or disabled. If the
                                   field begins with R, the record is
                                   enabled; a D indicates the record is
                                   disabled. By default, the MS-DOS record is
                                   enabled and the MS OS/2 record is
                                   disabled.

 13-14                             Reserved (always ~).

 Field                             Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Using a Remoteboot Workstation

 When a user starts a remoteboot workstation, what appears as the
 workstation's C drive is actually the workstation's work directory in the
 LANMAN\RPLUSER directory. If the remoteboot workstation has a hard disk,
 this disk appears as drive D. Floppy disk drives keep their original drive
 names.

 When MS-DOS users type dir, they see only files or directories that they
 created. MS OS/2 users also see the C:\OS2 and C:\LANMAN directories.


 Starting the Remoteboot Service

 The Remoteboot service must be running for the server to boot workstations
 remotely and to configure special server and workstation files. If the
 Alerter service is running, the Remoteboot service uses it to notify
 administrators of boot problems. To start these services automatically when
 the Server service starts, use the Setup program, or add remoteboot and
 alerter to the srvservices list in the [server] section of the LANMAN.INI
 file. For more information about LANMAN.INI entries, see the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Administrator's Reference.

 To configure the remoteboot server:


   1.  Edit the LANMAN.INI file's [remoteboot] section:

       ş   For the rpldir entry, specify the path to the directory containing
           the remoteboot software. The default is the LANMAN\RPL directory.

       ş   For the maxthreads entry, specify the maximum number of
           workstations that the server will boot simultaneously. The server
           can boot any number of workstations remotely.

       ş   For the rplx entry, specify the dynamic link libraries that the
           server's network adapter card uses. The first network adapter card
           has a rpl1 entry, the second a rpl2 entry, and so on.


   2.  If the server will boot MS OS/2 workstations, edit the LANMAN.INI
       file's [server] section:

       ş   Increase the value of the maxopens entry, adding 50 for each MS
           OS/2 workstation supported.

       ş   Increase the value of the maxconnections entry to twice the value
           of maxopens.

       ş   Set the value for maxlocks to the value set for maxopens.

       ş   Increase the value of the maxsessopens entry to at least 100.


   3.  Stop and restart both the Server and the Remoteboot services to put
       the changes into effect.


 The server is now set up to boot one remote workstation. When you turn the
 power on at that workstation, it will boot using the DEFAULT workstation
 record. At the same time, LAN Manager will add an entry to RPL.MAP listing
 the workstation's adapter ID. The following section explains how to modify
 RPL.MAP and create a work directory for the first workstation.


 Preparing a Workstation

 This section describes how to prepare the first workstation to use the
 Remoteboot service. If you want to add more remoteboot workstations, see the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.

 Preparing a workstation for remoteboot involves the following procedures:


   ş   Creating remoteboot directories

   ş   Adjusting user-level security

   ş   Adding a workstation record in the RPL.MAP file

   ş   Adding a .FIT file for the workstation

   ş   Modifying configuration files for an MS OS/2 workstation

   ş   Enabling the remoteboot process on a workstation with a hard disk



 Creating Remoteboot Directories

 To create remoteboot directories for the new workstation:


   1.  Choose a computername for the workstation; the computername can have
       as many as eight characters.

   2.  Create a workstation directory in the server's LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES
       directory.

       Name the directory LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\computername, where
       computername is the workstation's name. For example, for the computer
       RM150, you could create the logon directory LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\RM150.

   3.  Copy the LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\DEFAULT directory to
       LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\computername.

       The DEFAULT directory contains a CONFIG.SYS and STARTUP.CMD file and a
       LANMAN subdirectory with a LANMAN.INI file.

   4.  Create a work directory for the workstation in the server's
       LANMAN\RPLUSER directory.

       Name the directory LANMAN\RPLUSER\computername, where computername is
       the workstation's name. Or, create a subdirectory in the workstation's
       work directory for each user. For example, for the computer RM150, you
       could create the work directory LANMAN\RPLUSER\RM150, and then within
       it create a subdirectory for each user.

   5.  For an MS OS/2 workstation, copy all of the files in the
       LANMAN\RPLUSER\DEFAULT subdirectory to LANMAN\RPLUSER\computername.

       Or, if you set up the account under the user's name, copy the
       directory to LANMAN\RPLUSER\computername\username.



 Adjusting User-Level Security

 On a server with user-level security, you must create user accounts and
 assign permissions to allow access for remoteboot workstation users.

 If the server has user-level security:


   1.  Create a user account with the workstation's computername, adding the
       account name to the rpl group.

       Do not assign a password to this account. This account is used by the
       server to establish the identity of the workstation at boot time.

   2.  Create a user account for each person who will use the workstation.

       Use account names different from the computername. If you want to
       restrict this user to work only at this workstation, specify the
       computername of the workstation in the "Valid workstations" field (the
       net user /workstation option).

   3.  Assign the computer's account RWCDXA permissions for the work
       directory that the person will use. Specify that these permissions are
       to be inherited (using <Permit> and <Permit tree> in the LAN Manager
       Screen for administrators).

   4.  Assign the computer's account RX permissions for the
       LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\computername directory and specify that these
       permissions are to be inherited.



 Adding a Workstation Record

 When a remote workstation sends out a boot request over the network, a
 server checks whether its LANMAN\RPL\RPL.MAP file contains a workstation
 record for the workstation. If no record is found, the server waits until
 the number of requests specified in field 3 of the server record is received
 from the workstation. If this number is reached within the time specified in
 field 4 of the server record, the server boots the workstation using a copy
 of the enabled default workstation record.

 To add a new workstation record to a server's RPL.MAP file:


   1.  To make a backup copy of the RPL.MAP file, type

       copy rpl.map rpl.old

   2.  On the server, edit the RPL.MAP file's default workstation record,
       typing the server's computername in field 5.

   3.  RPL.MAP is initially adjusted to boot workstations with MS-DOS. To
       boot the workstation with MS OS/2:

       ş   Edit the default MS-DOS workstation record, replacing the R that
           begins field 12 with D. This disables the MS-DOS record.

       ş   Edit the default MS OS/2 workstation record, replacing the D that
           begins field 12 with R. This enables the MS OS/2 record.


   4.  Start the server's Server and Remoteboot services.

   5.  Start the remote workstation, and allow time for the server to respond
       to the workstation's boot request.



 Enabling Workstation Records

 When booting a workstation remotely for the first time, the server
 automatically creates a copy of the default workstation record in the
 RPL.MAP file and copies the workstation's adapter ID into field 1 of the new
 workstation record. Figure C.5 shows the RPL.MAP file as it appears when a
 new workstation record is added to the end of it.

   ???????????? DEFAULT ~ DOS401       RPLSERVR ~ ~ ~ ~,,, Z R_DOS ~ ~
   ???????????? DEFAULT ~ FITS\DEFAULT RPLSERVR ~ ~ ~ ~,,, ~ D_OS2 ~ ~
   .
   .
   .
   10005A25DDF8 DEFAULT ~ DOS401       RPLSERVR ~ ~ ~ ~,,, Z D_DOS ~ ~

 Figure C.5 A new workstation record in RPL.MAP

 The new record is automatically appended to the end of the RPL.MAP file. To
 boot the workstation using the new record, you must enable the record.
 Otherwise, the workstation will continue to use the default workstation
 record each time it boots.

 To enable a new workstation record:


   1.  Edit the new workstation record in the RPL.MAP file, making the
       following changes:

       ş   Type the workstation's computername in field 2.

       ş   Replace the D that begins field 12 with R.


   2.  If the workstation was booted using MS OS/2, change field 4 of the
       record to the pathname of the workstation's .FIT file
       (FITS\computername).

   3.  To put the RPL.MAP file changes into effect, reboot the workstation.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If the workstation has a hard drive, you must use the rplenabl utility to
 prepare the workstation for using the Remoteboot service. For information
 about rplenabl, see the "Enabling the Remoteboot Process on a Workstation's
 Hard Disk" section, later in this appendix.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ





 Adding a .FIT File for the Workstation

 Each workstation uses a file index table (.FIT file) to translate pathnames
 of certain files to the actual locations of the files on the server running
 the Remoteboot service. For example, if the user types c:\config.sys, the
 server running the Remoteboot service translates this to
 LANMAN\MACHINES\computername\CONFIG.SYS.

 To prepare a .FIT file for the first remoteboot workstation:


   1.  Change directories to the LANMAN\RPL\FITS directory.

   2.  Edit DEFAULT.FIT, changing all occurrences of RPLSERVR to the boot
       server's computername.

   3.  Copy DEFAULT.FIT to computername.FIT.

   4.  In the new computername.FIT file, change all instances of DEFAULT to
       the new workstation's computername.



 Adjusting Configuration Files for an MS OS/2 Workstation

 Each MS OS/2 remoteboot workstation has its own CONFIG.SYS, STARTUP.CMD,
 OS2INIT.CMD, and LANMAN.INI files, but uses a central copy of the MS OS/2
 and LAN Manager software. (MS-DOS remoteboot workstations use a central copy
 of the MS-DOS and LAN Manager initialization files.) You need to modify the
 workstation's own configuration files to suit that workstation. (For
 example, be sure to type the name of the server's domain for the domain
 entry in the workstation's LANMAN.INI file.)

 This section describes other adjustments you may need to make to the
 CONFIG.SYS and computer.FIT files.


 Video Display Device Drivers

 By default, the remoteboot workstation is configured to use the same type of
 video display as the one used by the server. If the workstation and server
 have different video display types, modify the CONFIG.SYS and computer.FIT
 files for the workstation.

 To configure the workstation for a video display that is different than the
 server's:


   1.  Modify CONFIG.SYS:

       ş   If the workstation has an EGA display monitor, find the three
           lines preceded by

           REM for VGA, use these

           Insert the word REM at the beginning of each of these three lines
           to comment out the lines.

           Find the three lines preceded by

           REM for EGA, use these

           Remove REM from the beginning of each of these three lines to
           enable the EGA configuration.

       ş   If the workstation has a CGA display monitor, find the three lines
           preceded by

           REM for VGA, use these

           Insert the word REM at the beginning of each of these three lines
           to comment out the lines.

           Add the following lines:

           devinfo=scr,cga,c:\os2\viotbl.dcp set video_devices=vio_ibmcga set
           vio_ibmcga=device(bvhcga)

       ş   Add configuration lines for any drivers the workstation requires
           that are not provided in the default CONFIG.SYS. Copy the drivers
           into the LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\computername directory.


   2.  In the new computername.FIT file, you may need to add a display device
       driver for the workstation. If the workstation uses the same type of
       display monitor as the server, don't change anything. If the
       workstation uses a different display monitor, type the following line
       in the computername.FIT file:

       c:\os2\dll\display.dll os2\dll\xxxxxx.dll

       where xxxxxx is the appropriate display driver for the workstation.
       The display driver is one of the following:

       ş   IBMCGA

       ş   IBMEGA

       ş   IBMVGA

           NOTE  If you want to allow users to edit their configuration
           files, copy the contents of LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\DEFAULT into the
           workstation's work directory instead of
           LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\computername. Then change all MACHINES
           subdirectory references in the workstation's .FIT file to
           \\servername\WRKFILES.



 Memory Swapping

 If the remote workstation has memory swapping enabled, the path for the swap
 file (the swappath entry) in LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\computername\CONFIG.SYS
 should be set to use the workstation's hard disk (if it has one). This
 ensures that the swapper information is available to MS OS/2 should the
 server go down, and the user will not lose the use of the workstation.

 If the remote workstation is diskless, the server can be used for the
 swappath; however, if the server goes down, the user will have to wait for
 it to come back up before using the workstation. If this is a concern, turn
 swapping off for diskless MS OS/2 workstations.

 To use a remoteboot workstation's local hard disk for memory swapping:


   1.  On the server, change directories to the
       LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\computername directory.

   2.  Edit the CONFIG.SYS file, setting the parameters as follows (pathname
       is the path of the swap directory):

       swappath=d:\pathname memman=swap,move,swapdos


 To use the server for swapping:


   1.  On the server, change directories to the
       LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\computername directory.

   2.  Edit the CONFIG.SYS file, setting the parameters as follows:

       swappath=c:\os2\system memman=swap,move,swapdos


 To turn swapping off for either case, change the CONFIG.SYS file as follows:


 memman=noswap,move


 Other CONFIG.SYS Options

 To increase performance, change the libpath line to the following:

 libpath=c:\os2\dll;c:\lanman\netlib;c:\;

 If the workstation does not have a hard drive or if its hard drive does not
 have any HPFS partitions, comment out the following line by adding REM to
 the beginning of the line:

 ifs=c:\os2\hpfs.ifs -c:64

 If the workstation will not use the DOS session, set the protectonly line to
 read protectonly=yes and comment out the following lines:

 device=c:\os2\dos.sys device=c:\os2\ega.sys


 Enabling the Remoteboot Process on a Workstation's Hard Disk

 Before a workstation with a hard disk can be booted remotely, its hard disk
 must be properly configured for the Remoteboot service. This does not
 prevent users from accessing the hard disk after the workstation is booted.


 Use the LAN Manager rplenabl utility to prepare the workstation to use the
 Remoteboot service. Later, if you want to boot the workstation using its
 hard disk, run the rpldsabl utility to disable the Remoteboot configuration.

 To configure a workstation's hard disk for the remoteboot process:


   1.  Create a LAN Manager utility disk:

       ş   Format an MS-DOS floppy disk.

       ş   Copy the files RPLENABL.EXE and RPLDSABL.EXE from the
           LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory to the disk.


   2.  Boot MS-DOS on the workstation.

   3.  Put the LAN Manager utility disk in drive A and type

       rplenabl

   4.  Remove the disk, and press CTRL+ALT+DEL.

       The Remote Program Load Module information is displayed as the RPL ROM
       chip initializes the network adapter card.



 Disabling the Remoteboot Process on a Workstation's Hard Disk

 If you no longer want to boot a workstation remotely and it contains a
 bootable hard disk, run the rpldsabl utility to disable the Remoteboot
 service configuration and let the workstation boot using its hard disk.

 To disable the Remoteboot configuration:


   1.  Boot MS-DOS on the workstation.

   2.  Put the LAN Manager utility disk containing the rpldsabl utility in
       drive A and type

       rpldsabl

   3.  Remove the disk, and press CTRL+ALT+DEL.

       The workstation will now boot from its hard disk.



 Troubleshooting the Remoteboot Service

 Two common problems with using the Remoteboot service are that the service
 does not start, or that workstations do not boot or have problems booting.

 If the Remoteboot service does not start, make these checks:


   ş   Check for typographical errors in the server and workstation records
       in the RPL.MAP file. If an error in the RPL.MAP file prevents the
       service from starting, normally you will receive an alert message (be
       sure the Alerter service is running).

   ş   Check the server's error log, which can provide useful diagnostic
       information.


 If a workstation won't boot remotely or you're having problems with the way
 the workstation is booting, check the following requirements:


   ş   Be sure that a workstation record exists in the RPL.MAP file for each
       remote workstation and that the record is enabled (unless you are
       using the default workstation record).

   ş   The server must have a computername.FIT file for each MS OS/2
       workstation that is to boot remotely. Check the LANMAN\RPL\FITS
       directory.

   ş   The boot image file, DOS401.IMG, must exist to successfully boot
       MS-DOS version 4.01 on workstations. Check the LANMAN\RPL\DOS
       directory.

   ş   Be sure you loaded the RPL.PRO profile. This shares the RPLFILES,
       WRKFILES, and IMAGES resources.

       Also be sure these resources have correct permissions assigned for
       them. RPLFILES (LANMAN\RPL directory) must have RX permissions
       assigned. WRKFILES (LANMAN\RPLUSER directory) must have RWCDXA
       permissions. IMAGES (LANMAN\RPL\DOS directory), used for MS-DOS
       workstations, must have RX permissions.

   ş   The domain entry in the workstation's LANMAN.INI file must match that
       of the server's domain entry listing. For MS OS/2 workstations, check
       the LANMAN\RPL\MACHINES\computername\LANMAN\LANMAN.INI file. For
       MS-DOS workstations, check the LANMAN\RPL\DOS\LANMAN.INI file.

   ş   The work directory (LANMAN\RPLUSER\computername) must exist for each
       remote workstation.

   ş   On servers with user-level security, each workstation's computername
       account must have no password and must be in the rpl group.

   ş   Each workstation must have a RPL ROM chip installed on or built into
       its network adapter card.

   ş   If a workstation has a hard disk, the hard disk must be prepared for
       the remoteboot process (using the rplenabl utility). Otherwise, the
       workstation will not boot remotely.

   ş   Be sure you have the correct video display device drivers installed
       for the workstation. (By default, the workstation is set up to use the
       same type of video display as the server.) If you try to remoteboot a
       VGA workstation with an EGA device driver, or vice versa, the screen
       will remain blank and the workstation will probably beep two or three
       times. If this happens, check both the CONFIG.SYS and computername.FIT
       files to see which device drivers are installed.








 Appendix D  Setting Up an Uninterruptible Power Supply
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 An uninterruptible power supply (UPS) is a battery connected to a computer
 that keeps the computer running during a power failure. LAN Manager has a
 UPS service, which lets a server and a battery work together to perform an
 orderly shutdown of the server in the event of a power failure. The battery
 keeps the server running until power is restored or until the UPS service
 determines that the battery is running low and the server should be shut
 down.

 This appendix describes how to set up a battery on a server. For more
 information about administering the UPS service, see the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Administrator's Guide.


 Attaching the Battery to a Server

 The battery must be attached to one of the server's serial (COM) ports. The
 battery manufacturer should provide a cable that enables the battery to
 correctly communicate with the LAN Manager UPS device driver, UPSDRV.OS2.
 The requirements for this cable are outlined in the rest of this section.

 Signals from the battery are sent to the UPS device driver by voltage
 changes on the pins of the UPS cable. Table D.1 shows the pins that the LAN
 Manager UPS device driver expects the battery and cable to use for the
 necessary signals.

 Table D.1 COM Port Pins Used for UPS Signals

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 UPS Signal    Equivalent Cable Signal                    COM Port Pin Number
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 UPS Signal    Equivalent Cable Signal                    COM Port Pin Number
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Line fail     CTS (Clear to Send)                        5

 Low battery   DCD (Carrier Detect)                       8

 UPS shutdown  DTR (Data Terminal Ready)                  20

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 You can also use batteries capable of only contact closure signals with the
 UPS service. For these batteries, the TXD (Transmit Data, pin 2) and RTS
 (Request to Send, pin 4) signals are used as voltage sources. TXD is set to
 a permanently low voltage, and RTS is set permanently high.

 As you administer a server that uses a battery, be sure that the COM port
 that the battery is attached to is never shared.


 Installing the UPS Device Driver

 LAN Manager provides a UPS device driver, UPSDRV.OS2. This driver works with
 all IBM PCs, PS/2(R) computers, and compatible serial ports. After attaching
 the battery to the server, a device entry must be added to the CONFIG.SYS
 file, installing the UPS device driver. The entry has the following syntax:

 device=c:\lanman\drivers\upsdrv.os2 [/port:comx]

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 This assumes that the pathname of the LANMAN directory is C:\LANMAN. The
 LANMAN directory path is set during installation and may have a different
 pathname.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The entry specifies the pathname of the UPS device driver. The value of the
 /port option specifies the COM port that the battery is attached to. If
 /port is omitted, COM1 is used as the default. For example, the following
 line installs the UPS device driver for a battery that is attached to the
 COM2 port of a server where the pathname for the LANMAN directory is
 C:\LANMAN:

   device=c:\lanman\drivers\upsdrv.os2 /port:com2

 If you use the Setup program to specify that the UPS service start
 automatically when the Server service starts, the Setup program
 automatically adds this entry to CONFIG.SYS, without the /port option. If
 the battery is attached to a COM port other than COM1, you must use a text
 editor to edit CONFIG.SYS after the Setup program ends, adding /port and
 specifying the COM port the battery is attached to.

 If you don't use the Setup program to specify that the UPS service start
 when the Server service starts, then you must use a text editor to add the
 entire entry to CONFIG.SYS.

 Although UPSDRV.OS2 is the only device driver necessary for the UPS battery,
 the CONFIG.SYS file may also contain entries installing drivers for other
 COM port devices (such as COM01.SYS, the MS OS/2 COM port driver). When you
 add the entry installing UPSDRV.OS2 to CONFIG.SYS, put it before the entries
 installing other COM port device drivers. The UPSDRV.OS2 entry must also be
 before the entry installing LAN Manager's RDRHELP.SYS file.

 Once the entry installing the UPS device driver has been added to CONFIG.SYS
 and specifies the correct COM port, restart the computer.






 Appendix E  Setup Menus and Menu Commands
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This appendix shows each menu available from the Setup Screen and describes
 each menu command. The menus are


   ş   Actions

   ş   Options

   ş   Exit



 Actions Menu

 Use the Actions menu to install, modify, save, or remove a configuration;
 detach or attach LAN Manager from the operating system; import network
 drivers; or view information about Setup. Figure E.1 shows the Actions menu.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The Actions menu has the following commands:

 Install
   Installs the selected configuration.

 View/modify
   Lets you view or modify the primary parameters of an installed
   configuration.

 Save
   Saves the current configuration.

 Remove
   Removes the installed configuration.

 Detach
   Temporarily removes LAN Manager from the MS OS/2 operating system,
   allowing an upgrade of MS OS/2.

 Attach
   Restores LAN Manager to the MS OS/2 operating system after using Detach.

 Import network drivers
   Installs network device drivers not shipped with LAN Manager.

 About setup
   Displays copyright and version information about LAN Manager and Setup.


 Options Menu

 Use the Options menu to establish the level of online help, fine-tune the
 performance of the installed configuration, or modify service parameters.
 Figure E.2 shows the Options menu.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The Options menu has the following commands:

 Program options
   Lets you select the level of online help, the method of backing up system
   files, and automatic tuning of performance settings for a server.

 Server
   Lets you view or modify server parameters.

 Workstation
   Lets you view or modify workstation parameters.

 Services
   Lets you select services for automatic startup. You can also view or
   modify the parameters of each service.


 Exit Menu

 Use the Exit menu to exit the Setup program. Figure E.3 shows the Exit menu.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The Exit menu has the following commands:

 Resume Setup
   Cancels the Exit menu without exiting the Setup Screen.

 Exit
   Exits the Setup Screen.






 Appendix F  Booting an HPFS386 Server from a Floppy Disk
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This appendix explains how to restart (boot) your computer using a floppy
 disk when the boot partition (usually the C drive) has the LAN Manager
 high-performance file system 386 (HPFS386) installed. You may need to do
 this if system files like CONFIG.SYS are damaged or if the file system has
 corrupt data that prevents booting.

 However, when you use a floppy disk to start a server with an HPFS386 boot
 partition, you will be able to edit only those files for which no LAN
 Manager permissions are assigned. Because servers with local security need
 permissions assigned for their system files, you will probably not be able
 to edit most system files on these servers. For information about system
 file permissions in local security, see the Microsoft LAN Manager
 Administrator's Guide.

 To boot from a floppy disk:


   1.  Put the MS OS/2 1.2 Installation Disk in drive A.

   2.  Restart the computer (press CTRL+ALT+DEL).

   3.  At the first screen that appears, press ESC when prompted with "Enter
       to continue or Esc to cancel."

       The [A:\] prompt appears.

   4.  Edit system files as necessary to correct the problem that is
       preventing booting.

   5.  Restart the computer.








 Glossary
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 10 User Pak
 See Additional User Pak.

 Additional User Pak
 An optional server modification that expands the number of users that can
 connect to a server. A server without Additional User Paks has a limit of
 five users. A 10 User Pak adds 10 users to the server's capacity. An
 Unlimited User Pak allows an unlimited number of users to access the server.
 Six 10 User Paks are equivalent to an Unlimited User Pak.

 Administrator
 The individual responsible for managing the local-area network. This person
 typically configures the network, maintains the network's shared resources
 and security, assigns passwords and privileges, and helps users.

 Alerter service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a server to send error messages and
 special alert messages to a designated list of users.

 Basic
 See LAN Manager Basic.

 Batch file
 See Batch program.

 Batch program
 A file containing commands that are carried out when the file runs. All MS
 OS/2 batch programs have the filename extension .CMD. All MS-DOS batch
 programs have the filename extension .BAT.

 Boot
 To turn on power for a computer and load the operating system into memory.
 See also Remote program load (RPL).

 Boot block configuration file
 A file containing information about network device drivers and other
 software needed to start an MS-DOS remoteboot workstation. See also Boot,
 Remoteboot service, and Remote program load (RPL).

 Boot image file
 A file on a server that acts as a boot disk for MS-DOS remoteboot
 workstations. See also Boot, Remoteboot service, and Remote program load
 (RPL).

 Caution
 A keyword used to indicate that failure to follow directions could result in
 damage to equipment or loss of data.

 Check box
 A field in a Setup Screen dialog box that lets you mark or unmark an option.

 Click
 To position the mouse pointer on a character, and then press and release the
 left mouse button.

 Command button
 A command name, enclosed in angle brackets, at the bottom of a dialog box
 (for example, <Zoom>>). Choosing a command button carries out a task or
 leads to another dialog box.

 Computername
 The name by which the local-area network identifies a server or a
 workstation. Each computername must be unique on the network.

 CONFIG.SYS
 A system configuration file for both MS OS/2 and MS-DOS. Use this file to
 customize the way the operating system runs on the computer. See also
 LANMAN.INI and PROTOCOL.INI.

 Corrective service diskette (CSD)
 A version identification number for OS/2.

 Default
 A value coded into the LAN Manager software. For LANMAN.INI entries, the
 default value of an entry is used when the entry is missing from LANMAN.INI.

 Device driver
 See Network device driver.

 Dialog box
 A box that appears on the Setup Screen when you choose a menu command.
 Dialog boxes typically present a number of options from which to select.

 Distributed application
 A program that coordinates activity between two or more computers, such as
 Microsoft SQL Server.

 Domain
 Servers and workstations that are grouped for administrative and security
 purposes.

 DOS session
 An MS OS/2 session that can run DOS applications. On a server with HPFS386
 partitions, you should not use the DOS session.

 Drive duplexing
 A fault-tolerance feature that sets up a primary partition and a secondary
 partition with identical data using separate disk controllers. Drive
 duplexing provides protection against errors caused by a faulty controller.
 Drive duplexing is available only for computers with the high-performance
 file system (HPFS). See also Drive mirroring, Fault-tolerance system,
 Primary partition, and Secondary partition.

 Drive mirroring
 A fault-tolerance feature that sets up a primary partition and a secondary
 partition on two disks using the same disk controller. The operating system
 treats these partitions as a single logical drive. Data lost from one
 partition is recovered from the other. Drive mirroring is available only for
 computers with the high-performance file system (HPFS) and the
 fault-tolerance system. See also Drive duplexing, Fault-tolerance system,
 Primary partition, and Secondary partition.

 Enhanced
 See LAN Manager Enhanced.

 Expanded memory
 Usable memory beyond the conventional memory limit of 640K for MS-DOS.
 MS-DOS application programs that correspond to the Lotus/Intel/Microsoft
 (LIM) expanded memory specification can use expanded memory. The EMM386.DOS
 device driver accesses expanded memory.

 Extended memory
 Memory from 1 megabyte (10,245K) to 16 megabytes (16,384K). Extended memory
 can be used with MS OS/2 or MS-DOS. The MS-DOS HIMEM.DOS device driver loads
 LAN Manager software into extended memory.

 FAT file system
 See File allocation table (FAT) file system.

 Fault monitoring
 A fault-tolerance feature that monitors the hard disk to prevent corruption
 or loss of data due to a hard disk malfunction. See also Fault-tolerance
 system.

 Fault-tolerance system
 A LAN Manager system that uses drive duplication and monitoring to prevent
 the corruption or loss of a computer's data. See also Drive duplexing, Drive
 mirroring, Fault monitoring, Primary partition, and Secondary partition.

 Field
 An area within a Setup Screen dialog box. See also Check box, Command
 button, Dialog box, List box, Option button, and Text box.

 File allocation table (FAT) file system
 An MS OS/2 and MS-DOS file system that tracks the location of files in
 directories. The file allocation table also allocates free space on disks to
 ensure that space is available for new files. MS OS/2 1.2 can replace the
 FAT file system with an installable file system, such as the
 high-performance file system (HPFS).

 High-performance file system (HPFS)
 An MS OS/2 file system that has faster input/output (I/O) than the file
 allocation table (FAT) file system, does not restrict file naming to eight
 characters with a three-character extension, and is compatible with the FAT
 file system. When you install LAN Manager server software on an HPFS
 partition, it becomes an HPFS386 partition. See also File allocation table
 (FAT) file system and High-performance file system 386 (HPFS386).

 High-performance file system 386 (HPFS386)
  An enhanced version of the high-performance file system designed to work
 with a 386 computer. HPFS386 includes an enhanced disk cache for servers and
 provides local security. See also High-performance file system (HPFS) and
 Local security.

 HPFS
 See High-performance file system (HPFS).

 HPFS386
 See High-performance file system 386 (HPFS386).

 Import
 To add a network device driver that was not shipped with LAN Manager.

 Installable file system
 A file system that can be installed in place of the usual file allocation
 table (FAT) file system, such as the high-performance file system (HPFS).

 Interprocess communication (IPC)
 The communication between different processes of a program, between
 different computers running parts of a single program, or between two
 programs working together. See also Distributed application and Named pipe.

 LAN
 See Local-area network (LAN).

 LAN Manager
 A Microsoft software program that expands the features of MS OS/2 and MS-DOS
 to enable computers to become part of a local-area network.

 LAN Manager Basic
 A version of LAN Manager that enables an MS-DOS computer to connect to
 local-area network directories and printers, and print jobs over the
 network. Using LAN Manager Basic, network tasks can be done from the command
 line only.

 LAN Manager Enhanced
 A version of LAN Manager that enables an MS-DOS computer to connect to
 local-area network directories and printers, print jobs over the network,
 send and receive network messages, and use profiles to automatically connect
 to network resources. Using LAN Manager Enhanced, network tasks can be done
 from the command line or from the LAN Manager Screen.

 LAN Manager Screen
 LAN Manager's menu-oriented screen interface.

 LANMAN.INI
 The LAN Manager initialization file. The values in this file determine the
 option settings for computers on the local-area network, although the net
 start and net config command options can temporarily override LANMAN.INI
 values. These values can be modified to suit the network requirements. See
 also CONFIG.SYS, Default, and PROTOCOL.INI.

 LIM
 Lotus/Intel/Microsoft expanded memory specification. See also Expanded
 memory.

 List box
 A box within a Setup Screen dialog box that contains a list of items from
 which you can select. In the LAN Manager Setup program, a list box sometimes
 contains check boxes so that you can select more than one item.

 Local security
 A security method available for 386 servers running the high-performance
 file system (HPFS386). This method extends LAN Manager security measures to
 protect the files on a server by restricting access for the users working at
 the server. With local security, a user must be assigned permissions to
 access any file or directory in an HPFS386 partition, whether or not the
 resource is shared as part of a LAN Manager resource.

 Local-area network (LAN)
 A group of computers, linked by cable or other physical media, that lets
 users share information and equipment.

 Loopback driver
 A local-area network device driver that lets a computer with no network
 adapter card run LAN Manager for testing purposes.

 Menu
 A set of related LAN Manager commands accessible from the Setup Screen.

 Menu bar
 The horizontal bar across the top of the Setup Screen that contains menus.
 See also Menu.

 Menu command
 A command you can choose from a menu on the Setup Screen. See also LAN
 Manager Screen, Menu, and Menu bar.

 Messenger service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a workstation or server to receive
 messages from other local-area network users. This service can also store
 messages in a log file.

 Microsoft SQL Server
 A Microsoft retail product that provides distributed database management.
 Multiple workstations manipulate data stored on a server, where the server
 coordinates operations and performs resource-intensive calculations.

 Microsoft Windows
 A Microsoft retail product that provides a graphical interface to the MS-DOS
 operating system.

 Monolithic driver
 A network device driver that acts as a network adapter card driver and
 protocol driver combined. See also Network adapter card driver, Network
 device driver, and Protocol driver.

 MS OS/2 Presentation Manager
 The graphical interface to the MS OS/2 operating system.

 Named pipe
 A connection used to transfer data between separate processes, usually on
 separate computers. Named pipes are the foundation of interprocess
 communication. See also Interprocess communication (IPC).

 Netlogon service
 A LAN Manager service that implements logon security. When a server in a
 domain runs the Netlogon service, the username and password supplied by each
 user who attempts to log on in the domain are checked. All servers
 participating in logon security run the Netlogon service; the Netlogon
 service replicates a domainwide user accounts database to these servers. See
 also Primary domain controller and Standalone server.

 Netpopup service
 A LAN Manager service that displays messages on the computer screen when
 they arrive from other local-area network users or from LAN Manager.

 Netrun service
 A LAN Manager service that lets users run programs on a server from their
 own workstations.

 Network adapter card
 A printed circuit board, installed in a computer, that enables the computer
 to run LAN Manager software and join the local-area network.

 Network adapter card driver
 A network device driver that controls the physical function of a network
 adapter card. See also Network adapter card, Network device driver, and
 Protocol driver.

 Network device driver
 A program that enables the LAN Manager software to communicate with network
 adapter cards. See also Network adapter card driver and Protocol driver.

 Option button
 One of a set of options in a Setup Screen dialog box. You can select only
 one option from the set.

 Peer service
 A LAN Manager service that enables an MS OS/2 workstation to share
 directories, one printer queue, and one communication-device queue with one
 other local-area network user at a time. The Peer service performs most of
 the same services as the Server service, but on a smaller scale. See also
 Server service.

 Permissions
 Settings that define the type(s) of action a local-area network user can
 take with a shared resource.

 Primary domain controller
 The server at which the master copy of a domain's user accounts database is
 maintained. The primary domain controller also validates logon requests. See
 also Netlogon service and Standalone server.

 Primary partition
 In drive mirroring or drive duplexing, the main partition in a mirrored or
 duplexed pair. Only the primary partition is visible to the operating
 system. See also Drive duplexing, Drive mirroring, Fault-tolerance system,
 and Secondary partition.

 Print spooler
 Software that manages print requests. The print spooler is part of the MS
 OS/2 operating system.

 Protocol
 A set of rules and conventions for data exchange.

 Protocol driver
 A network device driver that implements a protocol, controlling one or more
 network adapter card drivers. See also Network adapter card driver, Network
 device driver, and Protocol.

 PROTOCOL.INI
 The Protocol Manager initialization file. This file, along with CONFIG.SYS
 and LANMAN.INI, controls the configuration of LAN Manager network device
 drivers. This file describes all protocol and network adapter card drivers
 and defines how to bind them together. See also CONFIG.SYS and LANMAN.INI.

 Remote program load (RPL)
 To start a computer and load the operating system into memory when the
 operating system software is provided by a server on the network. See also
 Remoteboot service.

 Remoteboot
 See Remote program load (RPL) and Remoteboot service.

 Remoteboot service
 A LAN Manager service that provides software support for starting MS OS/2
 and MS-DOS workstations over the local-area network. See also Boot, Boot
 block configuration file, Boot image file, Remote program load (RPL), Server
 record, and Workstation record.

 Replicator service
 A LAN Manager service that maintains identical sets of files and directories
 on different servers and MS OS/2 workstations running the Peer service.

 Scroll bar
 The shaded bar that appears at the right of some Setup Screen list boxes and
 help boxes. Use the scroll bar and the mouse to scroll through a list box
 that contains more information than can be shown in one screen. See also
 Scroll box.

 Scroll box
 The small box superimposed on a scroll bar in a list box. The scroll box
 reflects the position of the information within the list box in relation to
 the total contents of the list. See also Scroll bar.

 Secondary partition
 In drive mirroring or drive duplexing, the drive that duplicates data on the
 primary partition. The secondary partition is invisible to the operating
 system, which sees the primary and secondary partitions as a single logical
 drive. See also Drive duplexing, Drive mirroring, Fault-tolerance system,
 and Primary partition.

 Security
 A variety of methods that enables an administrator to control access to
 network resources. See also Share-level security and User-level security.

 Server
 A computer that manages and shares the data and equipment on a local-area
 network.

 Server record
 An entry in the LANMAN\RPL\RPL.MAP file that defines an operating system
 supported by the server for remoteboot. See also Remoteboot service.

 Server service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a computer to share resources on the
 network and provides administrators with tools for controlling and
 monitoring resource use. See also Peer service.

 Setup program
 The program that installs LAN Manager software on a workstation or server.
 During installation, the Setup program is copied to the computer's hard disk
 for later use in managing the computer's configuration.

 Setup Screen
 LAN Manager's menu-oriented screen interface for installation and
 configuration.

 Share-level security
 A type of security that limits access to each shared resource by requiring a
 password. Permissions are assigned to the resource (rather than to the
 user). All users who know the password can use the resource within the
 bounds of the permissions assigned for the resource. See also Permissions
 and User-level security.

 SQL Server
 See Microsoft SQL Server.

 Standalone server
 A server that maintains its own user accounts database and does not
 participate in logon security. See also Netlogon service and Primary domain
 controller.

 System configuration file
 See CONFIG.SYS.

 Text box
 An area in which information can be typed in a Setup Screen dialog box. The
 text box may or may not contain text.

 Timesource service
 A LAN Manager service that identifies a server as the time source for a
 domain. Other computers can synchronize their clocks with the time source.

 Uninterruptible power supply (UPS)
 An optional retail product that connects to a computer, providing emergency
 backup power in case of a power failure. See also UPS service.

 Unlimited User Pak
 See Additional User Pak.

 UPS service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a server to use an uninterruptible power
 supply (UPS). The UPS service protects the server from data loss during a
 power failure. See also Uninterruptible power supply (UPS).

 User accounts database
 The NET.ACC file stored in the LANMAN\ACCOUNTS directory. This file contains
 the user accounts and groups that have been established.

 User-level security
 A type of security in which a user account is set up for each user.
 Permissions are then granted to each user for specific resources, defining
 exactly what actions each user can take with each resource. See also
 Share-level security.

 Username
 The name by which the local-area network identifies a user. The username and
 password are required for the user to gain access to the network. The
 username can be the same as the computername.

 Windows
 See Microsoft Windows.

 Workstation
 A computer from which a person uses the local-area network.

 Workstation record
 An entry in the LANMAN\RPL\RPL.MAP file that contains information about a
 remoteboot workstation. See also Remoteboot service.

 Workstation service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a computer to use local-area network
 resources and services. The Workstation service must be running for any
 other service to run.





 INDEX
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 10 User Pak
 286 computer, memory requirements
 286 microprocessor
 386 computer
   HPFS386 enhancements
   memory requirements
 386 microprocessor
 8086/88 microprocessor

     A
 Accessalert entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Accounts, user
   default account (for Remoteboot)
 Actions menu
   Attach command
   Detach command
   Import command
   Install command
   Remove command
   Save command
   View/modify command
 Adapter ID number, defined
 Additional User Pak
 Administrative account (default)
   for Peer service
 Alerter service
   changing
   defined
   effect on Remoteboot
   parameters
   starting automatically
 Alertnames entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Alerts, providing instant popups
 Alertsched entry (LANMAN.INI)
 AT-compatible computer
 Audit trail, saving
 Auditing entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Autodisconnect entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Autodisconnect feature
   OS/2 workstations
   servers
 AUTOEXEC.BAT file
   backing up
   effect of exit line on installation
   Setup changes
 Autopath entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Autoprofile entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Autostart feature
 Autostarting
   Server services
   Workstation services

     B
 Backacc command
 Backup file
   .BAK method
   decimal method
 Backup method, selecting
 Batch file, requirements
 Batterytime entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Boot block configuration file, defined
 Boot block processor
 Boot image file
    see also Remoteboot service
   creating
   defined
   for Remoteboot
     troubleshooting
   relationship to boot block configuration file
 Boot partition
 Boot server
    see also Remoteboot service
 Booting workstations remotely
 Buttons (dialog boxes)

     C
 Call command
   and batch files
 Charcount entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Chartime entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Charwait entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Check box
 Cmdfile entry (LANMAN.INI)
 COM port pins
 Commands, menu
   About setup
   Attach
   choosing
     keyboard movements
     mouse movements
   Detach
   Exit
   Import network drivers
   Install
   Program options
   Remove
   Resume setup
   Save
   Server
   Services
   View/modify
   Workstation
 Computername entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Computername, requirements
 Config menu (Ftsetup Screen)
   Delete drive(s) command
   Expose orphaned drive(s) command
   Mirror drive(s) command
   Remove the fault tolerance system command
   Unmirror drive(s) command
   View drive status command
 CONFIG.OS2, for dual-boot computer
 CONFIG.SYS file
   backing up
   for Remoteboot
     swappath entry
   network device driver
   removing HPFS386
   Setup changes
 Configuration
   adjusting
   completing
   viewing
 Contents of manual

     D
 Dedicated server, conflict with Peer service
 DEFAULT.FIT file
 Default
   account (for Remoteboot)
   boot image file (Remoteboot)
   remoteboot servername
   remoteboot workstation computername
   server records (RPL.MAP)
 Dialog box
   choosing a button
     keyboard movements
   exiting
   moving between fields
     keyboard movements
     mouse movements
   selecting a check box
   selecting an option button
   using a list box
     keyboard movements
 Disk driver
   DISK02.SYS
 DISK02.SYS extended disk driver
 Diskalert entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Distributed applications
 Domain entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Domain names, requirements
 Domains
   and Remoteboot
   defined
 DOS directory
   for Remoteboot
 DOSxxx directory, for Remoteboot
 DOS401.IMG file
 DOS402.IMG file, troubleshooting
 Drive mirroring and duplexing
   defined
   file system requirements
 Drive status, viewing
 Drives
   mirroring
   unmirroring

     E
 8086/88 microprocessor
 EMM386.DOS
   system requirements
 Encrypt service
   starting automatically
 Encrypting
   passwords
   usernames
 Error log, saving
 Erroralert entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Exit line (in AUTOEXEC.BAT), effect on installation
 Exit line (in STARTUP.CMD), effect on installation
 Exit menu
   Exit command
 Exiting Setup
 Expanded memory manager
 Exportlist entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Exportpath entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Extended memory manager

     F
 F1 key
 Fault monitoring, defined
 Fault-tolerance system
   file system requirements
   removing
   setting up
 Fields (dialog boxes)
 File allocation table (FAT) file system
 File systems
   FAT. See File allocation table (FAT) file system
   HPFS. See High-performance file system (HPFS)
 .FIT files
   for Remoteboot
     troubleshooting
 FITS directory, for Remoteboot
 Ftsetup utility
   starting

     G
 Groups, standard
   rpl
 Guardtime entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Guest account
   defined
   specifying
 Guestacct entry (LANMAN.INI)

     H
 Hard disks
   disabling a workstation's for Remoteboot
   enabling a workstation's for Remoteboot
 Hardware
   network adapter cards
     settings
 Help level, selecting
 Help screens, scrolling
 Help system
 Help System
   and F1 key
 Help system
   Full Help
 Help System
   Specific Help (F1)
 High-performance file system (HPFS)
   and local security
   and server performance
   autocheck
   cache
   enhancements for 386 computers
   locating program files in an HPFS partition
   restoring
 High-performance file system 386 (HPFS386)
   booting server from floppy disk
   cache
   detaching
   DISK02.SYS
   removing file permissions
   removing
 HIMEM.DOS
 Home directories, saving
 HPFS386
    see High-performance file system 386 (HPFS386)
 HPFS
    see High-performance file system (HPFS)

     I
 IBM OS/2
 IMAGES resource (Remoteboot service)
 .IMG files
    see Boot image file
 Import command
 Importing network device drivers
 Importlist entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Importpath entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Installation
   incomplete installations
   information required
   installing LAN Manager with no network adapter card
   memory requirements
   modifying
   of MS-DOS workstations
     installing network device drivers
   of OS/2 workstations
     installing network device drivers
   of servers
   prerequisites
   systems requirements
 Interval entry (LANMAN.INI)
 IPC resources

     K
 Keepconn entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Keepsearch entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Keyboard, use with Setup

     L
 \laCancel\ra button
 \laDone\ra button
 LAN Manager files, specifying location
 LAN Manager
   Additional User Pak
     autodisconnect limit
     maxusers limit
   adjusting configuration
   attaching
   detaching
   removing previous version
   removing
   saving files
   upgrading
     installing new operating system
     restoring files
     saving files
     steps to take
 LANMAN directory
   FITS subdirectory
   for Remoteboot
     assigning permissions
   RPL subdirectory
 LANMAN.DOS directory, for Remoteboot
 LANMAN.INI file
   adjusting parameters
   network device drivers
   relationship to primary parameters
   relationship to Setup settings
   remoteboot adjustments for the boot server
   {remoteboot} section
 \laOK\ra button
 LIM 4.0 Expanded Memory Specification
 LIM 4.0 memory manager
 List box
   keyboard movements
   mouse movements
 Local security
   conflict with Peer service
   defined
   file system requirements
   installing on a server
 Logfile entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Logical drive, defined
 Logon entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Logonalert entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Logs, saving
 Loopback driver, use with LAN Manager
 LOOPDRV.OS2

     M
 MACHINES directory
   for Remoteboot
 Mailslots entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Main screen for Setup
 Makeimg utility
 Manuals
   contents of this manual
   other manuals in this set
 Maxauditlog entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxchdevjob entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxchdevq entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxchdevs entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxcmds entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxconnections entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxerrorlog entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxlocks entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxopens entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxruns entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxsearches entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxsessopens entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxsessreqs entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxshares entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxthreads entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxusers entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Maxwrkcache entry (LANMAN.INI)
 MCA
    see Micro Channel architecture
 Memory manager
 Memory requirements
   for MS-DOS workstation
     specifying available memory
   for OS/2 workstation
     specifying available memory
   for server
     specifying available memory
 Memory swapping
   on remoteboot workstations
     using the local hard disk
     using the server
 Memory, adjusting
 Menus
   Actions
   displaying
   Exit
   Options
 Messages, sending and receiving
 Messdelay entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Messenger service
   changing
   defined
   parameters
   starting automatically
 Messtime entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Micro Channel architecture
 Microsoft SQL Server
 Microsoft Windows, expanded memory manager
 Mirrored drives
   exposing orphaned mirrors
   managing
 Mirroring drives
 Modifying LAN Manager
   starting Setup
 Mouse, use with Setup
 MS OS/2 HPFS
    see High-performance file system (HPFS)
 MS OS/2 workstation
   installing
   system requirements
 MS OS/2
   difference with IBM OS/2
   upgrading
 MS-DOS workstation
   installing
     defining primary parameters
     specifying available memory
     starting services automatically
   system requirements
 MS-DOS, version 4.01

     N
 Named pipes
 Names
   computername requirements
   DEFAULT workstation computername
   domain name requirements
   username requirements
 Net run command
 NET.ACC file
 Netioalert entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Netlogon service
   changing
   defined
   parameters
   starting automatically
 Netpopup service
   defined
   starting automatically
 Netrun service
   changing
   defined
   parameters
   starting automatically
 Network adapter card drivers
   installing
 Network adapter card
   adapter ID number
   and Remoteboot
   installing
   settings
 Network device drivers
   and Remoteboot
   importing
   installing on MS-DOS workstations
   installing on OS/2 workstations
 Notational conventions
 Numadmin entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numalerts entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numbigbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numcharbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numdgrambuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numfiletasks entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Nummailslots entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numreqbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numresources entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numservers entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numservices entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numviewedservers entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Numworkbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)

     O
 10 User Pak
 Online help
 Option buttons
 Options menu
   Program options command
   Server command
   Services command
   Workstation command
 Options, changing
 Orphaned mirrors, exposing
 OS/2 workstation
   installing
     defining primary parameters
     specifying available memory
     starting services automatically
 OS2 directory
   for Remoteboot
 OS2.INI file
 OS2SYS.INI file
 Othdomains entry (LANMAN.INI)

     P
 Partition, primary
   detached
 Partitions
   deleting
   mirroring
 Password entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Passwords
   default administrative password
   encrypting
 Peer service
   defined
   fine-tuning
   installing
     choosing a security type
     limiting users
     setting autodisconnect time for sessions
     specifying the guest account
     supplying a comment
   memory requirements
   starting automatically
   system requirements
 Performance
   fine-tuning
   optimal file system for servers
 Planning the installation
 Power failures, setting up for shutdowns
 Primary parameters
   and LANMAN.INI
   and
   changing
   for MS-DOS workstations
     defined
     Workstation-specific
   for OS/2 workstations
     defined
     Workstation-specific
   for Peer service
     Peer service parameters
   for servers
     defined
     server-only parameters
     Workstation-specific
   viewing
 Print spooler
 Printbuftime entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Processing power
   sharing the servers
   sharing the workstations
 Profiles, saving
 Program options, setting
 Protocol drivers
 PROTOCOL.INI file
 Protocols, installing
 Pulse entry (LANMAN.INI)

     R
 Random entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Randomize entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Recharge entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Refresh entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Remote entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Remoteboot service
   advantages
   defined
   how it works
   preparing a boot server
     LANMAN.INI adjustments
   preparing a workstation
     accounts and permissions (user-level security)
     creating a RPL.MAP record
     creating configuration files (MS OS/2)
     disabling Remoteboot
     disabling the local hard disk
   RPL directory tree
   RPLUSER directory tree
   saving files
   setting up memory swapping on a remoteboot workstation
   starting automatically
   troubleshooting
   using a remoteboot workstation
 Remove command
 Removing previous version of LAN Manager
 Replicate entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Replicator service
   changing
   defined
   parameters
   saving files
   starting automatically
 Requirements
   memory
   system
 Revoke tree command
 RPL directory
    see also Remoteboot service
 Rpl group
   troubleshooting
 RPL ROM chip
 RPL.MAP file
   defined
   enabling a workstation record
   server record
     default record
     enabling a record
   troubleshooting
   workstation record
     adding
     default record
     enabling a new record
 RPL.PRO, Remoteboot changes
 Rpldir entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Rpldsabl utility
 Rplenabl utility
 RPLFILES resource (Remoteboot service)
    see also Remoteboot service: RPL directory tree
 RPLSERVR computer
 RPLUSER directory (Remoteboot service)
    see also Remoteboot service
   creating work directories
 RTS
 Runpath entry (LANMAN.INI)

     S
 Saving LAN Manager files
 Scripts entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Scripts, saving
 Scroll bar
 Scroll box
 Scrolling help screens
 Secondary partition, defined
 Security entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Security, choose a type at installation
 SEND.FILE.REQUEST frame
 Server parameters
   automatic tuning
   changing
 Server records
    see RPL.MAP file
 Servers
   administering a remote server
   automatic tuning of parameters
   dedicated
   fine-tuning
   hidden
   installing
     choosing a security type
     defining primary parameters
     limiting users
     local security
     setting autodisconnect time for sessions
     specifying available memory
     specifying the guest account
     starting services automatically
     supplying a comment
   memory requirements
   preparing a boot server
   system requirements
 Services
   Alerter, changing
   changing
   Messenger, changing
   Netlogon, changing
   Netrun, changing
   Replicator, changing
   starting Server services automatically
   starting Workstation services automatically
   UPS, changing
 Sessions
   disconnecting inactive sessions automatically
 Sesstimeout entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Setup disk
 Setup program
   and Remoteboot
   automatic performance tuning
   changing the backup method
   defaults
   exiting
   menus
     Actions
     Exit
     Options
   specifying program file locations
   starting
     after installation
     at installation
   storing on computer
   using the screen
     choosing a command
     displaying a menu
     keyboard movements
     main screen
     mouse movements
     working with dialog boxes
 Setup Screen
   Actions menu
   Exit menu
   Options menu
 Share-level security
 Sharing processing power
 Signals entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Sizalertbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Sizbigbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Sizcharbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Sizerror entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Sizmessbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Sizreqbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Sizworkbuf entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Srvanndelta entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Srvannounce entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Srvcomment entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Srvhidden entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Srvservices entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Standalone server
 Starting LAN Manager automatically
 Starting Setup
   after installation
   at installation
 STARTUP.CMD file
   backing up
   effect of exit line on installation
   Setup changes
 Swappath entry (CONFIG.SYS)
    see CONFIG.SYS
 Synchronizing computer clocks
 System files, changing the backup method
 System requirements
   for servers

     T
 286 computer, memory requirements
 286 microprocessor
 386 computer
   HPFS386 enhancements
   memory requirements
 386 microprocessor
 TAB key
 Time, synchronizing computer clocks
 Timesource service
   defined
   starting automatically
 Tryuser entry (LANMAN.INI)
 TXD

     U
 Uninterruptible power supply
    see UPS
 Unlimited User Pak
 Update entry (LANMAN.INI)
 UPS service
   changing
   defined
   parameters
   starting automatically
 UPS
    see also UPS service
   attaching
   COM port pins
   defined
   installing
   signals
 User accounts database
   converting
   saving
 User-level security
 Username entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Username
   encrypting
   requirements
 Userpath entry (LANMAN.INI)
 Userpath, conflict with Peer service
 Users
   limiting Peer service use
   limiting server use
 Using Setup

     V
 Voltlevels entry (LANMAN.INI)

     W
 Work directories (for Remoteboot)
   creating
   defined
   location
   troubleshooting
   user's view
 Workstation parameters
   changing MS OS/2
   changing MS-DOS
 Workstation record
    see RPL.MAP file
 Workstation
   and Remoteboot
   MS-DOS
     Basic, memory requirements
     differences between two versions
     distributed applications
     Enhanced, memory requirements
     named pipes
   OS/2
     memory requirements
   remoteboot workstation
     adjusting memory swapping
     creating an MS-DOS 4.01 boot image file
     creating configuration files for MS OS/2
     disabling the local hard disk
     how the process works
     limiting the number that boot remotely
     returning to local boot
     setting up
 WRKFILES resource (Remoteboot service)
    see also Remoteboot service: RPL directory tree
 Wrkservices entry (LANMAN.INI)

