 Microsoft LAN Manager - User's Guide for MS OS/2








 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
            Microsoft(R) LAN Manager - User's Guide for MS(R) OS/2

                                 VERSION 2.0
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


                            Microsoft Corporation







 Information in this document is subject to change without notice and does
 not represent a commitment on the part of Microsoft Corporation. The
 software described in this document is furnished under a license agreement
 or nondisclosure agreement. The software may be used or copied only in
 accordance with the terms of the agreement. It is against the law to copy
 the software on any medium except as specifically allowed in the license or
 nondisclosure agreement. No part of this manual may be reproduced or
 transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
 photocopying and recording, for any purpose without the express written
 permission of Microsoft Corporation.  U.S. Government Restricted Rights  The
 SOFTWARE and Documentation are provided with RESTRICTED RIGHTS. Use,
 duplication, or disclosure by the Government is subject to restrictions as
 set forth in subparagraph (c) (1) (ii) of The Rights in Technical Data and
 Computer Software clause at 252.227-7013 or paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of
 Commercial Computer DocumentationÄRestricted Rights at 48 CFR 52.227-19, as
 applicable. Contractor/Manufacturer is Microsoft Corporation/One Microsoft
 Way/Redmond, Washington 98052-6399.
 (C)1990 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.


 Printed in the USA.




 Microsoft, MS, MS-DOS, XENIX, and the Microsoft logo are registered
 trademarks of Microsoft Corporation.

 IBM is a registered trademark of International Business
 Machines Corporation.

 Document Number: SY10059-0590
  OEM-P787-2Z






 Table of Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Before You Begin
      How To Use This Manual
      Notational Conventions
      Finding Further Information


 PART I  Learning the Basics
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Chapter 1  Overview

      How LAN Manager Works
      Features of LAN Manager
             The LAN Manager Screen
             Command-Line Commands
             Online Help
             Profiles
             Services
      Working with Other Network Products

 Chapter 2  Getting Started

      Starting LAN Manager
             Starting the Workstation Service and Logging On
      The LAN Manager Screen
             Using Menus and Menu Commands
             Using Dialog Boxes
      Getting Online Help
             Getting Help with the LAN Manager Screen
             Getting Help from the Command Line
             Getting Help with Error Messages
      Viewing Network Resources
             Setting the Current Focus
             Viewing Shared Resources
             Viewing Users on the Network
      Understanding User Accounts
             Viewing Information About User Accounts
             Changing Your Password
      Exiting the LAN Manager Screen
      Quitting LAN Manager
             Logging Off from the Network
             Stopping Services
      Starting LAN Manager Automatically
      The LANMAN.INI File


 PART II  Using LAN Manager
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Chapter 3  Using Shared Directories

      Viewing Shared Directories
      Connecting to a Shared Directory
             Connecting to a Shared Directory Without Setting the Focus
             Making a Onetime Connection to a Shared Directory
      Viewing Your Connections
      Copying Files over the Network
      Moving Files Over the Network
      Running a Program on a Server
      Disconnecting from a Shared Directory
      Using Home Directories

 Chapter 4  Using Shared Printers

      Printer Queues
      Using the Print Manager
      Viewing Printer Queues and Print Jobs
      Connecting to a Printer Queue
             Connecting to a Printer Queue Without Setting the Focus
             Making a Onetime Connection to a Printer Queue
      Viewing Your Connections
      Printing over the Network
      Holding, Releasing, and Deleting a Print Job
      Disconnecting from a Printer Queue

 Chapter 5  Using Shared Communication Devices

      Communication-Device Queues
      Viewing Communication-Device Queues
      Connecting to a Communication-Device Queue
      Sending a Request to a Communication-Device Queue
      Viewing Your Connections
      Viewing a Communication Request
      Deleting a Communication Request
      Disconnecting from a Communication-Device Queue

 Chapter 6  Sending and Receiving Messages

      Sending Messages
      Reading Messages
             Using the Netpopup Service
             Reading Your Message Log
             Specifying a Different Message Log
             Stopping and Starting Message Logging
             Printing Messages
      Using Aliases
             Adding an Alias
             Deleting an Alias
      Forwarding Messages
      Stopping Message Forwarding

 Chapter 7  Customizing Your Workstation

      Using Profiles
             Creating a Profile
             Loading a Profile
      Controlling Services
             Pausing the Workstation or Peer Service
             Continuing the Workstation or Peer Service
             Stopping Services
             Starting a Service
      Getting Workstation Information
             Reading the Error Log
             Viewing Performance Statistics
             Viewing the Workstation Configuration

 Chapter 8  Using the Peer Service

      Introduction to the Peer Service
      Peer Service Features
      Installing and Starting the Peer Service
      Using the PUBLIC Shared Directory
      Additional LAN Manager Services


 PART III  User's Command Reference
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 User's Command Reference
      Abbreviating Commands
      Using /yes and /no Options
      Using Passwords with Commands
      Using Special Characters with Commands
      Controlling a Screen Display
      Using Commands in Batch Programs
      Command Summary
             Net
             Net Access
             Net Comm
             Net Config Peer
             Net Config Workstation
             Net Continue
             Net Copy
             Net Error
             Net Forward
             Net Help
             Net Helpmsg
             Net Load
             Net Log
             Net Logoff
             Net Logon
             Net Move
             Net Name
             Net Password
             Net Pause
             Net Print
             Net Run
             Net Save
             Net Send
             Net Start Messenger
             Net Start Netpopup
             Net Start Peer
             Net Start Workstation
             Net Statistics
             Net Stop
             Net Time
             Net Use
             Net View
             Net Who

 Appendix A  Menu Commands

      The LAN Manager Screen
      View Menu
      Message Menu
      Config Menu
      Status Menu
      Accounts Menu
      Help Menu

 Appendix B  Using the MS OS/2 Print Manager with LAN Manager

      The MS OS/2 Print Manager Window
      Using MS OS/2 Print Manager with Network Printers
             Viewing Printers
             Setting Up a Printer
             Changing the Settings for a Printer
             Viewing Queues
             Adding a Queue
             Changing Options for a Queue
             Updating Information in the MS OS/2 Print Manager Window

 Appendix C  Country Codes


 Glossary


 Index




 Before You Begin
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The Microsoft(R) LAN Manager User's Guide for MS(R) OS/2 is for new and
 experienced users of Microsoft LAN Manager for Microsoft Operating System/2
 (MS OS/2). This manual assumes that you know how to use a personal computer
 and that you are familiar with MS OS/2. If you are not familiar with MS
 OS/2, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).

 Before using this manual, you should read Getting To Know Microsoft LAN
 Manager to learn terms and concepts specific to a local-area network and to
 LAN Manager.


 How To Use This Manual

 This manual is divided into three parts:

 Part 1, "Learning the Basics"
   Part 1 explains how a local-area network works and describes LAN Manager
   features. It also describes how to start LAN Manager software and use the
   LAN Manager Screen. You should read this part if you are not familiar with
   LAN Manager.

 Part 2, "Using LAN Manager"
   Part 2 explains how to use shared resources on the network: shared
   directories, printers, and communication devices. It also explains how to
   send messages to other network users, customize your workstation, and
   share resources on your workstation with other network users. You should
   read this part if you plan to use the LAN Manager Screen for most of your
   network tasks.

 Part 3, "User's Command Reference"
   Part 3 describes each LAN Manager command that can be typed at the MS OS/2
   prompt. You should read this part if you plan to use the command line to
   perform network tasks.


 Notational Conventions

 This manual uses different type styles and special characters for different
 purposes:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Convention        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Bold              Represents commands, command options, and file entries.
                   Type the words exactly as they appear, for example, net
                   use.

 Italic            Introduces new terms and represents variables. For
                   example, the variable computername indicates that you
                   supply the name of a workstation or server.

 Monospace         Represents examples, screen displays, program code, and
                   error messages.

 FULL CAPS         Represent filenames and pathnames in text. You can,
                   however, type entries in uppercase or lowercase letters.

 SMALL CAPS        Represent key names (such as CTRL or F2).

 KEY+KEY           Indicates that you must press two keys at the same time.
 Convention        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
KEY+KEY           Indicates that you must press two keys at the same time.
                   For example, "Press CTRL+Z" means to hold down CTRL and
                   press Z.

 {braces}          Enclose required items in syntax statements. For
                   example, {yes | no} indicates that you must specify yes
                   or no when using the command. Type only the information
                   within the braces, not the braces themselves.

 [brackets]        Enclose optional items in syntax statements. For
                   example, [password] indicates a password may be needed
                   with the command. Type only the information within the
                   brackets, not the brackets themselves.

 | (vertical bar)  Separates items within braces or brackets. For example,
                   {/hold | /release | /delete} indicates that only one of
                   the three options can be used.

 ... (ellipsis)    In syntax statements, indicates that you can repeat the
 Convention        Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
... (ellipsis)    In syntax statements, indicates that you can repeat the
                   previous item(s). For example, /route:devicename[,...]
                   indicates that you can specify more than one device,
                   putting a comma between the devicenames.

 <Command>         Indicates a command button to be chosen within a dialog
                   box.

                  Indicates the procedure for performing a task using the
                   LAN Manager Screen.

 Command          Indicates the procedure for performing a task using LAN
  Line             Manager commands at the MS OS/2 prompt.




 Finding Further Information

 In addition to this manual, the LAN Manager manual set includes the
 following:

 Getting To Know Microsoft LAN Manager
   Gives first-time network users an introduction to local-area networks and
   to LAN Manager.

 Microsoft LAN Manager User's Guide for MS-DOS(R)
   Provides guide and reference information about using LAN Manager Enhanced
   and Basic on MS-DOS workstations.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Installation Guide
   Provides information about installing LAN Manager software and using the
   Setup program to configure workstations and servers.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide
   Provides detailed information about administering the LAN Manager network.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Reference
   Provides reference information about LAN Manager commands and utilities
   for MS OS/2 computers, and about the LAN Manager program directory and
   initialization file.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Network Device Driver Guide
   Provides information about network device drivers that can be used with
   LAN Manager.

 Microsoft LAN Manager Programmer's Reference
   Provides information about LAN Manager application program interfaces
   (APIs). (This manual is optionally available.)

 Quick references are also available for users and administrators.






 PART I  Learning the Basics
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Part 1 introduces LAN Manager for MS OS/2.

 Chapter 1 describes how a local-area network works and explains LAN Manager
 features.

 Chapter 2 introduces the LAN Manager Screen and explains how to start and
 stop LAN Manager, log on to and log off from the network, and view network
 resources.






 Chapter 1  Overview
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter describes Microsoft LAN Manager for MS OS/2. It introduces the
 LAN Manager Screen and explains how to enter commands at the MS OS/2 prompt.
 It also describes online help, profiles, and LAN Manager services.


 How LAN Manager Works

 LAN Manager expands the features of MS OS/2 to let your computer join a
 local-area network.A local-area network is a group of personal computers
 that can communicate with each other and share resources.

 A LAN Manager network is comprised of workstations and servers. Workstations
 are computers that can use information and equipment on the network. Servers
 are computers that control information and equipment that workstations use.
 A server can also be used as a workstation.

 Information and equipment are made available to you and other network users
 through a process called sharing.The servers on a network share resources
 with network users at workstations. Resources can include disk directories,
 printers, modems, plotters, and scanners. A server can also be set up to let
 a user at a workstation run a program on the server's processor.

 You can use a shared resource by connectingyour workstation to the server
 sharing the resource. The resource is then used as though it were attached
 to your computer, even if it is actually located down the hall or in another
 part of the building.

 To help organize a network, servers and workstations can be set up to belong
 to a domain. A domain is a group of workstations and servers that is
 established to simplify network administration and security. After you start
 your workstation, you log on in a domain on the network, usually one that
 has the servers you will use most often. You can also use resources that are
 shared on servers in domains other than the domain into which you log on.

 The person who maintains the network is called an administrator. A network
 can have one or more administrators, who share resources at servers, set up
 and manage domains, and handle network security. If you need a password to
 connect to a shared resource or if you have trouble using your workstation,
 ask your administrator for help.


 Features of LAN Manager

 This section introduces some of the features of LAN Manager, including the
 LAN Manager Screen, commands, online help, profiles, and services.


 The LAN Manager Screen

 The LAN Manager Screen is a menu-oriented, full-screen interface that allows
 you to use LAN Manager without memorizing command syntax. Most network tasks
 can be performed with the LAN Manager Screen.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 See Chapter 2, "Getting Started," for information about how to use the LAN
 Manager Screen.


 Command-Line Commands

 In addition to using the LAN Manager Screen to perform network tasks, you
 can also type LAN Manager commands at the MS OS/2 prompt. (This can be done
 in another MS OS/2 session or by exiting the LAN Manager Screen.) All
 network tasks can be performed from the command line.

 Chapters 2-7 describe procedures for performing network tasks with the LAN
 Manager Screen, followed by the equivalent command-line command. For tasks
 that cannot be performed using the LAN Manager Screen, the command-line
 command is discussed in more detail. For detailed information about all
 typed LAN Manager commands, see Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Online Help

 Help is available both from the LAN Manager Screen and from the MS OS/2
 command line. The LAN Manager Screen provides context-sensitive help on most
 topics. From any dialog box, you can get help with the dialog box as well as
 many associated functions and terms.


 Profiles

 LAN Manager allows you to make connections to shared resources, then save a
 record of these connections in a file called a profile. You can use this
 profile to automatically reestablish the connections.

 Connections specified in a profile can replace existing connections or be
 added to them. For information about creating and using profiles, see
 Chapter 7, "Customizing Your Workstation."


 Services

 A service is a program that performs one of the major functions of LAN
 Manager. Major services are the following:

 Workstation
   The Workstation service is the primary service for a workstation. If the
   Workstation service isn't running, no other service can run. Once you
   start the Workstation service and log on, you can use the network and gain
   access to shared resources. For information about starting the Workstation
   service and logging on, see Chapter 2, "Getting Started."

 Messenger
   The Messenger service lets you receive messages from other network users
   or from LAN Manager (for example, when your print job has been printed).
   You can use message logging to save these messages in a file. For more
   information about the Messenger service, see Chapter 6, "Sending and
   Receiving Messages."

 Netpopup
   The Netpopup service displays messages on your screen as they arrive from
   other users or from LAN Manager. For more information about the Netpopup
   service, see Chapter 6, "Sending and Receiving Messages."

 Peer
   The Peer service gives your workstation many of the features of a server.
   You can share resources, such as a disk directory or a printer, with one
   other user at a time. For more information about the Peer service, see
   Chapter 8, "Using the Peer Service."

 Alerter
   When the Peer service is installed on your computer, the Alerter service
   sends messages about network events to users.


 Working with Other Network Products

 LAN Manager software works with products outside the LAN Manager family.
 Figure 1.1 shows a network with mixed products.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 For example, computers running MS-Net or XENIX (R) network software can
 share resources with LAN Manager workstations. However, since these servers
 don't use LAN Manager software, their resources are not visible from the LAN
 Manager Screen or from LAN Manager commands that display available
 resources.






 Chapter 2  Getting Started
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter explains how to start the Workstation service and log on to the
 network.

 The LAN Manager Screen is described, with instructions for moving around the
 screen using the keyboard and the mouse. Information is provided for getting
 help with commands and error messages, viewing network resources, and
 understanding user accounts. This chapter ends with an explanation of how to
 exit the LAN Manager Screen and quit LAN Manager.

 If LAN Manager hasn't been installed on your computer, contact your
 administrator.

 The procedures in this chapter to tell how to use the LAN Manager Screen,
 followed by the equivalent command you type at the MS OS/2 prompt. Each LAN
 Manager command is discussed in detail in Part 3, "User's Command
 Reference."


 Starting LAN Manager

 Starting LAN Manager involves two separate tasks:


   ş   Starting the Workstation service

   ş   Logging on to the network


 When you start the Workstation service, software that lets you use shared
 resources and send and receive messages is loaded into your computer's
 memory.

 Logging on identifies you on the network and establishes you as the user of
 the workstation. When you log on, you supply your username and password,
 which identify you as a member of a domain.

 Domains have names just like workstations and servers. When you log on, you
 automatically log on in the workstation domain. You don't need to specify
 the workstation domain; it is specified in the LAN Manager software. You can
 override the workstation domain by supplying the name of a different domain
 in which to log on. This domain is called the logon domain.

 A server called the primary domain controller or a logon server verifies
 that you are allowed to log on in a domain. On this server, the
 administrator maintains a record of user accounts, which define the hours
 that each user can log on and the access that he or she has to resources in
 the domain.


 Starting the Workstation Service and Logging On

 The procedure for starting the Workstation service and logging on to the
 network using the LAN Manager Screen is given first, followed by the
 equivalent commands typed from the command line.

   To start the Workstation service and log on:


   1.  Start the LAN Manager Screen from the command line by typing

       net

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Typing net /mono improves the LAN Manager Screen display for some computer
 screens. Try the command with and without /mono to determine which display
 you prefer.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


       The following message box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       Your username should appear in the "Username" text box. If it is not
       displayed, see your administrator. You can specify a different
       username by typing over the username that is displayed.

   2.  To supply a password, press TAB to move the cursor to the "Password"
       text box, then type your password.

       The password is not displayed as you type it.

   3.  To move the cursor to the "Domain" text box, press TAB. Leave this
       text box blank to log on in the workstation domain. Type a domain name
       to specify a logon domain.

   4.  To move to the <OK> command button, press TAB. Then press ENTER.

       The following message box appears, prompting you to start the
       Workstation service:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   5.  To choose <OK>, press ENTER.

       Message boxes are then displayed, telling you that the Workstation
       service is starting, that the logon was successful, and what privilege
       level you have at your workstation. The privilege level defines the
       range of action you have at your workstation or on a server. To remove
       message boxes from the LAN Manager Screen, press ESC.


 Along with the Workstation service, LAN Manager, by default, starts these
 other services:


   ş   The Messenger service, which lets you send, receive, and log messages.


   ş   The Netpopup service, which displays messages on your computer's
       screen when they are received from another user or a server on the
       network. These messages are not part of the LAN Manager Screen; they
       appear regardless of which application you are using. The Netpopup
       service requires that the Messenger service be running.


 These services are described in more detail in Chapter 6, "Sending and
 Receiving Messages."

 Command Line    To start the Workstation service and log on:


   1.  Start the Workstation service by typing

       net start workstation

   2.  Log on to the network by typing

       net logon [username [password | *]] [/domain:name]


 See Net Start Workstation and Net Logon, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 The LAN Manager Screen

 The LAN Manager Screen lets you browse around the network, locate shared
 resources, and connect to those resources without having to memorize
 commands or syntax.

 Figure 2.1 shows the LAN Manager Screen, noting the elements of the screen.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The fields of the LAN Manager Screen provide the following information:

 Menu bar
   Displays the names of menus from which you can choose commands.

 Current focus
   Shows the computername of your workstation or the server that is the focus
   of activity when using LAN Manager Screen commands.

 Workstation information
   Provides the following information about your workstation:

     Your username
       The username specified when you logged on to the network.

     Your computername
       The computername specified when the workstation was started.

     Your domain
       The name of your logon domain. This is the domain name specified when
       you logged on to the network. If you didn't specify a domain name, you
       automatically logged on in the workstation domain. Note that the
       workstation domain and the logon domain are the same if you logged on
       in the workstation domain.

 Servers in the logon and workstation domains
   Lists the servers in your logon and workstation domains.

 Scroll bar
   Lets you scroll through the servers in the list box with the mouse.

 Message line
   Provides a brief statement about the current menu, command, or task.

 To use the LAN Manager Screen, you select a menu, which displays a list of
 commands. When you choose a command, a dialog box appears, in which you type
 information to perform a task.

 The following sections explain menus and dialog boxes and tell you how to
 use the keyboard and the mouse to move through them and perform tasks.


 Using Menus and Menu Commands

 Menus are the starting point for any LAN Manager Screen operation. The names
 of all six menus appear in the menu bar across the top of the LAN Manager
 Screen. When you select a menu, a list of commands appears. Except for Exit
 on the View menu, each command leads to a dialog box. If a menu command does
 not contain a highlighted letter, the command is not available.

 From menus on the LAN Manager Screen, you can perform the following tasks:

 View
   View and connect to resources shared on servers, view your workstation's
   connections, and view information about users on the network. You can also
   exit the LAN Manager Screen.

 Message
   Send, log, and read messages, and specify an alias (a name used to receive
   messages).

 Config
   Log on, log off, use profiles, change and view your workstation
   configuration, or control LAN Manager services.

 Status
   View workstation statistics and the error log.

 Accounts
   Change the options for your account and change your password at a server.

 Help
   Get different types of help with LAN Manager.

 When viewing or selecting menus and menu commands, use these keys:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Key                 Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 ALT                 Activates menu names on the menu bar.

 Highlighted letter  Once menu names are activated with ALT, or menu
                     commands are displayed,selects the menu or chooses the
                     menu command containing the highlighted letter.

                   Once a menu is displayed,moves from one menu to
                     another.

                    Once a menu is displayed,moves from one command to
 Key                 Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                   Once a menu is displayed,moves from one command to
                    another.

 ENTER               Selects the highlighted menu or menu command.

 ESC                 Removes a menu from the screen.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 To select a menu with the mouse, click the menu name (use the mouse to
 position the pointer on the menu name and press the left mouse button). The
 menu appears, and you can choose a menu command by clicking it.


 Using Dialog Boxes

 Dialog boxes supply information you use to perform a task. They contain as
 many as five types of areas, or fields. Each dialog box has a title, which
 is displayed at the top.


 Dialog Box Fields

 Dialog boxes contain one or more of the following types of fields:


   ş   Text boxes, which receive typed information

   ş   List boxes, which present a list of items to choose from

   ş   Check boxes, which let you mark or unmark an option

   ş   Option buttons, which let you select one of several options

   ş   Command buttons, which perform an action


 Figure 2.2 shows a dialog box with four types of fields.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 Use the following keys to move around in a dialog box:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Highlighted letter                Moves the cursor to the field containing
                                   the highlighted letter. If the cursor is
                                   in a list box or a text box,hold down ALT
                                   while pressing the highlighted letter. If
                                   moving to a command button, pressing the
                                   highlighted letter activates the command
                                   button.

 TAB                               Moves the cursor to the next field.

 SHIFT+TAB                         Moves the cursor to the previous field.

 ENTER                             Carries out the actions you specified.
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
ENTER                             Carries out the actions you specified.

 ESC                               Cancels any actions and closes the dialog
                                   box.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 The following sections describe each type of dialog box field.

 Text Boxes - In a text box, you type information. A text box is surrounded
 by brackets and contains a series of dots that are replaced with characters
 as you type. It sometimes holds more characters than appear between the
 brackets. You can view these characters by using the RIGHT direction key to
 scroll to the left. Sometimes a text box appears with information provided,
 such as your username.

 When in a text box, use the following keys:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  Moves the cursor one space to the left.

                                  Moves the cursor one space to the right.

 HOME                              Moves the cursor to the first character in
                                   the text box.

 END                               Moves the cursor to the last character in
                                   the text box.

 DEL                               Deletes the character that the cursor is
                                   on.

 BACKSPACE                         Deletes the character to the left of the
                                   cursor.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 If you are using the mouse, you can scroll the characters in the text box by
 clicking the left or right bracket.

 List Boxes - A list box lets you view items by scrolling through a list, or
 select an item from the list. For example, you can view lists of resources
 available on a server or lists of print jobs waiting to be printed.

 Use the following keys to move around in a list box:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  Moves the cursor up one line.

                                  Moves the cursor down one line.
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                 Moves the cursor down one line.

 PG UP                             Moves the cursor up one page. (A page is
                                   the portion of the list that appears on
                                   the screen.)

 PG DN                             Moves the cursor down one page.

 HOME                              Moves the cursor to the top of the list.

 END                               Moves the cursor to the bottom of the
                                   list.

 F5                                Updates a list.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Pressing a letter while the cursor is in a list box (including the list box
 of server names on the LAN Manager Screen) moves the cursor to the next item
 that begins with that letter.

 A scroll bar and a scroll box are displayed at the right of the list box.

 The scroll bar lets you use the mouse to move through a list with more than
 one screen of information. Click the up or down arrow to move the view up or
 down one line.

 The position of the scroll box reflects the position of the information in
 the window relative to the total contents of the list. You can move through
 the list with the mouse by dragging the scroll box (positioning the pointer
 on the scroll box, holding down the left mouse button, then moving the mouse
 up or down).

 To select an item in a list box with the mouse, click the item. If the
 dialog box has a <Zoom> command button, double-clicking an item (positioning
 the pointer on the item and quickly pressing and releasing the mouse button
 twice) zooms in on it. Otherwise, double-clicking performs the action
 corresponding to the first command button listed.

 If a dialog box has a pair of list boxes, double-clicking an item in one
 list box often moves it to the other list box.

 Check Boxes - With a check box, you turn an option on or off. When a check
 box is marked with an X, the option is on. Use the SPACEBAR as a toggle
 switch to mark or unmark a check box.

 To mark or unmark a check box with the mouse, click it.

 Option Buttons - With an option button, you select one option from a group
 of options. One option button is always selected, and only one option button
 can be selected at a time.

 To select an option button, use the following keys:

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  Changes the selection to the previous
                                   option.
 Key                               Action
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                                  option.

                                  Changes the selection to the next option.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 To select an option button with the mouse, click it.

 Command Buttons - A command button performs a specific action. If a command
 button does not contain a highlighted letter, the command button is
 unavailable.

 To choose a command button, press TAB to move to the button and press ENTER.
 You can also press the highlighted letter in the command button (if the
 cursor is in a list box or text field, you must hold down the ALT key while
 pressing the highlighted letter).

 To choose a command button with the mouse, click it.


 Getting Online Help

 Online help is available for the LAN Manager Screen and for LAN Manager
 commands typed at the MS OS/2 prompt.


 Getting Help with the LAN Manager Screen

 There are two ways to get help while using the LAN Manager Screen: by
 selecting the Help menu or by pressing F1. The Help menu provides access to
 help topics.

 To get information about a menu, command, or dialog box, press F1 while that
 item is displayed. If you press F1 with no dialog box or menu displayed, the
 following message box appears:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To remove a help box from the screen, choose <Done> or press ESC.


 Getting Help from the Command Line

 Several types of help are available from the command line.

 Command Line    To get a list of commands and topics for which help is
 available, type

 net help

 To display detailed information about command, type

 net help command

 To display a command's options, type

 net help command /options

 To display a command's syntax, type

 net command /?

 See Net Help, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Getting Help with Error Messages

 You can get help with error messages received while working in the LAN
 Manager Screen or from the command line.

   To get help with an error that occurs while you are using the LAN Manager
 Screen:

 Press F1 while the message box is displayed.

 Command Line    To get help with an error message, type

 net helpmsg message#

 See Net Helpmsg, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Viewing Network Resources

 With the View menu, you can view servers and shared resources on the
 network, and view users on a server or in a domain.

 After you log on, a list of visible servers in your workstation domain (and
 your logon domain, if a domain other than the workstation domain was
 specified at logon) is displayed on the LAN Manager Screen. You may not have
 access to all servers listed, and all servers you have access to may not be
 visible. Your administrator determines whether a server is visible on the
 network. Check with your administrator to find out which servers are
 available to you.


 Setting the Current Focus

 When you start the LAN Manager Screen, the "Current focus" line and the "Set
 current focus on" text box display your workstation's computername. This
 means your workstation is the focus of activity when you use menus and
 dialog boxes.

 Using the LAN Manager Screen, you can connect to shared resources and
 perform other tasks at servers. The first step in performing a task is to
 set the current focus on the server that is sharing the resources you want
 to view or use. This makes the server the focus of activity.

   To set the current focus on a server:


   1.  Select the computername of a server by scrolling through the list box
       or pressing the first letter of the server's computername until the
       name appears in the "Set current focus on" text box. Or you can type
       the server's computername in the "Set current focus on" text box.

   2.  Press ENTER, or double-click the server name.

       The server's computername is then displayed on the "Current focus"
       line, and a message box is displayed that shows your privileges on
       that server.



 Viewing Shared Resources

 After setting the current focus on a server, you can view that server's
 directories, printer queues, and comm queues.

   To view shared resources on a server:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server that you want to view.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Available resources.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The dialog box shows the different types of resources available on
       that server. Available resources include shared directories (Disk),
       printers (Printer), and communication-device queues (Comm).

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 For more information about connecting to and using shared resources, see
 Chapter 3, "Using Shared Directories," Chapter 4, "Using Shared Printers,"
 and Chapter 5, "Using Shared Communication Devices."

 Command Line    To view shared resources on a server, type

 net view \\computername

 See Net View, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Network Paths

 Every shared resource on the network is identified by a network path. This
 is the computername of the server sharing the resource followed by the
 resource's sharenameÄthe name an administrator assigns to it. The
 computername is preceded by two backslashes (\\), and the sharename is
 preceded by one backslash (\).

 For example, \\SALES\REPORTS specifies the network path for the REPORTS
 shared directory on the \\SALES server.

 Network paths are used in dialog boxes and in commands typed at the MS OS/2
 prompt.


 Viewing Users on the Network

 You can view a list of users whose workstations are connected to a
 particular server or who are logged on in a particular domain.

   To view information about users connected to a server:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server that you want to view.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Users on a server.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 2.3 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       For each user with a connection to the server, this dialog box lists
       the username, the computername of the workstation where the user is
       logged on, the length of time since the connection was established,
       and the user's full name.

   3.  To view more information about a user, in the list box, select the
       username and choose <Zoom>.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 2.4 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   4.  Choose <Done>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view information about users connected to a server, type

 net who [\\computername]

 See Net Who, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."

   To view users logged on in a domain:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Users on a domain.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Known domains" list box, select a domain and choose <OK>.

       A dialog box appears that lists the users logged on in that domain.
       The fields contain the same types of information as those shown in the
       "Current Users on Server \\computername" dialog box (Figure 2.3).

   3.  To view more information about a user, in the list box, select the
       username and choose <Zoom>.

       More information about the user appears in the "Information on user
       username" dialog box (Figure 2.4).

   4.  Choose <Done>.

   5.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To view users logged on in a domain, type

 net who /domain:name

 See Net Who, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Understanding User Accounts

 LAN Manager uses user accounts to control access to domains and shared
 resources. These accounts contain information about users. In a domain,
 accounts specify which users can log on. At servers, accounts identify which
 users can use shared resources.

 In a domain, your account includes the username and password that you must
 supply to log on, your full name, a comment about you, and a record of the
 hours during which you can log on. When you log on in a domain, the domain
 controller or a logon server verifies that the username and password you
 supply match those in an existing user account.

 An account on a server includes your username and the password you must
 supply to gain access to the server's resources. If the password you
 supplied when you logged on matches the password in a server's account, you
 can use the server's resources. Otherwise, you must supply a password when
 connecting to a resource to gain access. Note that having an account on a
 server does not guarantee access to all of its resources. Your administrator
 can set up permissions for each user to control access to each of the
 server's resources.


 Viewing Information About User Accounts

 You can view information about your account, such as your username, account
 privileges, date of last log on, and logon times.

   To view detailed information about your user account:


   1.  To view information about your account in the logon domain, set the
       current focus on your workstation, or to view information about your
       account at a server, set the current focus on that server.

   2.  From the Accounts menu, choose Your account.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       If the current focus is set on your workstation, the computername
       displayed in the dialog box title is that of the primary domain
       controller.

       Except for the "User comment" and "Country code" fields, the
       information in this dialog box cannot be changed.

       The "User comment" text box lets you add a comment about yourself that
       others can read, such as your office location or phone extension. This
       comment is displayed after your name in the "Information on user
       username" dialog box under the Users on a server or Users on a domain
       command in the View menu. It is also displayed when you type net who
       username from the command line. The "User comment" field can have as
       many as 48 characters.

       The "Country code" number specifies the language in which servers send
       messages to you. For more information about country codes, see
       Appendix C, "Country Codes."

   3.  Choose <Logon times>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box displays the times during which you can use the
       server's resources. Your administrator determines these times. You
       cannot edit any of the fields.

   4.  Choose <Done>.

   5.  Choose <OK>.



 Changing Your Password

 You may need to change your password for an account if, for example, it is
 nearing expiration. LAN Manager alerts you when your password is expired.

 See your administrator if you forget a password.

   To change your password:


   1.  To change your password in your logon domain account, set the current
       focus on your workstation, or to change your password at a server, set
       the current focus on that server.

   2.  From the Accounts menu, choose Change your password.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  In the "Old password" text box, type your current password.

   4.  In the "New password" text box, type the new password.

   5.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To change your password, type

 net password [[\\computername | /domain:name] username oldpassword
 newpassword]

 See Net Password, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Exiting the LAN Manager Screen

 Exiting the LAN Manager Screen returns you to the MS OS/2 prompt but does
 not log you off from the network or stop LAN Manager services. You can still
 use the connections you made from the LAN Manager Screen.

   To exit the LAN Manager Screen:


   1.  Press ESC to close each open dialog box.

   2.  Press F3, or from the View menu, choose Exit.


 The LAN Manager Screen disappears, and the MS OS/2 prompt appears.

 To restart the LAN Manager Screen, type net at the MS OS/2 prompt.


 Quitting LAN Manager

 Quitting LAN Manager involves two steps:


   ş   Logging off from the network

   ş   Stopping the workstation service



 Logging Off from the Network

 Logging off removes your username and password from the workstation and
 cancels any existing connections to shared resources, but does not stop LAN
 Manager services. If you log off when you won't be using the workstation for
 a while, no one can use your network identity to use resources to which you
 have access.

   To log off from the network:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Log off from LAN.

       If you have any connections, the following message box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  To continue logging off, choose <OK>.

       The following message box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Once logged off, you can't use any shared resources. However, the
 Workstation service is still running.

 Command Line    To log off from the network, type

 net logoff

 See Net Logoff, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Stopping Services

 When you stop the Workstation service, all network services are stopped and
 connections to the network are ended. You must restart the Workstation
 service and log on if you want to use the network again.

 Alternatively, the workstation can be paused. Pausing puts the workstation
 on hold but keeps your username and password active. It also pauses any
 other services, such as Messenger or Netpopup, that are running. For more
 information about pausing services and stopping individual services, see
 Chapter 7, "Customizing Your Workstation."

   To stop the Workstation service:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Stop LAN Manager services.

       A message box appears, warning you that network connections will be
       canceled:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  To continue stopping, choose <OK>.

       A message box appears, telling you that the Workstation service is
       stopping.


 Command Line    To stop the Workstation service, type

 net stop workstation

 See Net Stop, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Starting LAN Manager Automatically

 LAN Manager commands that can be typed at the MS OS/2 prompt can be put in
 batch files so that they run automatically.

 You can add LAN Manager commands to the STARTUP.CMD file, which runs
 whenever you start MS OS/2. For example, to start the Workstation service
 when you start your computer, put the following command in the STARTUP.CMD
 file:

 net start workstation

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 To maintain network security, do not put your passwords in a batch program.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 To learn more about batch programs, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).

 For more information about LAN Manager commands, see Part 3, "User's Command
 Reference."


 The LANMAN.INI File

 As you work with LAN Manager, you'll see that many aspects of your
 workstation's performance are predefined. For example, when you start the
 LAN Manager Screen, your username probably appears in the "Log Onto Network"
 dialog box. Likewise, your workstation is set up to include a computername,
 workstation domain, and so on.

 These features or settings are defined in a file called LANMAN.INI, which
 resides in the LANMAN directory. LANMAN.INI is an initialization file that
 contains an entry with a default value for each setting. You can change
 settings temporarily by using the net start command. To change them
 permanently, edit the LANMAN.INI file.

 You normally won't need to adjust LANMAN.INI entries. For information about
 adjusting entries, see your administrator.

 The LANMAN.INI file is discussed in Chapter 7, "Customizing Your
 Workstation." Settings and values are defined in the Microsoft LAN Manager
 Administrator's Reference.





 PART II  Using LAN Manager
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Part 2 provides the procedures for performing network tasks.

 Chapters 3, 4, and 5 describe how to use shared directories, printers, and
 communication devices on the network. Chapter 6 tells how to send and
 receive messages over the network. Chapter 7 discusses how to customize your
 workstation to make it perform the way you want.

 The final chapter, Chapter 8, discusses how to use the Peer service (it must
 be installed on your workstation).






 Chapter 3  Using Shared Directories
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 A shared directory is a disk directory on a server to which users of the
 network have access. A shared directory contains files that are available to
 network users. Using a shared directory, one person can write a report,
 another person can review it, and a third person can format and print it,
 all without passing a floppy disk around the office.

 This chapter explains how to use shared directories. It includes procedures
 for viewing, connecting to, and disconnecting from a shared directory, and
 for seeing which shared directories your workstation is connected to. In
 addition, the command-line syntax for moving and copying files over the
 network and for running a program on a server is provided.


 Viewing Shared Directories

 To see which shared resources are available to you, the Workstation service
 must be running, and you must be logged on to the network. For information
 about starting the Workstation service and logging on, see Chapter 2,
 "Getting Started."

 The LAN Manager Screen displays a list of visible servers. This includes
 servers in the workstation domain, logon domain, and other domains (if any)
 specified in the LANMAN.INI file.

   To view shared directories:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server whose shared directories you want
       to view.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Available resources.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 3.1 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       Shared directories are listed as "Disk" in the "Type" column.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view shared directories, type

 net view \\computername

 See Net View, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Connecting to a Shared Directory

 Connecting to a shared directory allows you to use the directory as if it
 were another disk drive on your workstation. When you connect to a shared
 directory, you can use files or programs in that directory. You can also
 send a copy of a file or a program to the directory for use by others. You
 usually assign a devicename to the directory. A devicename is a name by
 which your computer identifies a device. A disk drive devicename is a letter
 followed by a colon.

 Your computer's floppy disk drives use the devicenames A: and B:, and the
 hard disk has the devicename C:. If you have a second hard disk, RAM disk,
 or have partitioned your hard disk, devicename D: might be devoted to it.
 Shared directories can use the remaining letters of the alphabet as
 devicenames.

   To connect your workstation to a shared directory:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server that has the shared directory you
       want to use.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Available resources.

       The "Resources Available at \\computername" dialog box (Figure 3.1)
       appears. The list box displays available resources on the server.
       Directories are listed as "Disk" in the "Type" column.

   3.  In the list box, select the directory to which you want to connect.

   4.  Choose <Use resource>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       LAN Manager provides the next available devicename, but you can type a
       different one.

   5.  In the "Password" text box, type a password if needed.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

   7.  Choose <Done>.


 The workstation is now connected to the directory you selected. You can use
 it the same way that you use your workstation's disk drives, as shown in
 Figure 3.2.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 Command Line    To connect your workstation to a shared directory, type

 net use devicename \\computername\sharename [password]

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Connecting to a Shared Directory Without Setting the Focus

 The LAN Manager Screen allows you to connect your workstation to shared
 directories on servers other than the server of current focus. This includes
 servers that are not visible on the LAN Manager Screen and servers in other
 domains.

 LAN Manager also lets you connect your workstation to servers on the network
 that are not running LAN Manager (for example, XENIX servers). Because these
 servers have different interfaces, their computernames do not appear on the
 LAN Manager Screen.

   To connect to a directory on a server other than the server of current
 focus:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 3.3 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Choose <Add use>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       LAN Manager has preselected "Disk" in the "Type of Use" box.

       LAN Manager provides the next available devicename, but you can supply
       a different one.

   3.  In the "Network resource" text box, type the network path of the
       directory.

   4.  In the "Password" text box, type a password if needed.

   5.  Choose <OK>.

   6.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To connect to a directory on a server other than the server
 of current focus, type

 net use devicename \\computername\sharename [password]

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Making a Onetime Connection to a Shared Directory

 You can use a shared directory without assigning a devicename to it. Do this
 from the command line by using the network path as part of a pathname in a
 command or an application program.

 For example, to use Microsoft Word to edit the LIST.DOC file in the shared
 directory with the network path \\SALES\FARWEST, start Word and load the
 file by typing

   word \\sales\farwest\list.doc

 The Word program loads the file even though you haven't made a connection to
 \\SALES\FARWEST. Note that this procedure will not work if a password is
 needed to gain access to \\SALES\FARWEST. If so, you must first establish
 access to the directory.


 Viewing Your Connections

 At any time, you can view directories connected to your workstation.

   To view directories connected to your workstation:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The "Resources in Use by username at \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 3.3) appears. Devicenames D: through Z: in the "Device" column
       identify connections to shared directories.

   2.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view directories connected to your workstation, type

 net use

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Copying Files over the Network

 Use the net copy command to copy a file over the network, to or from your
 workstation, or between servers. The MS OS/2 copy command can be used in
 place of net copy, but net copy is faster when both the source and
 destination are on the same server. Files can be copied from the command
 line only.

 Command Line    To copy a file, type

 net copy source [destination]

 For example:

   net copy \\production\lists\sales.doc \\production\reports

 See Net Copy, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Moving Files Over the Network

 Use the net move command to move a file over the network, to or from your
 workstation, or between servers. Files can be moved from the command line
 only.

 The net move command differs from the net copy command in that it deletes
 the file at its source location when it moves the file.

 Command Line    To move a file, type

 net move source [destination]

 If no destination is specified, the file moves to the current directory.

 See Net Move, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Running a Program on a Server

 Use the net run command to run a program on a server. Running a program on a
 server can be done from the command line only.

 The server must be configured to accept remote program requests. See your
 administrator for help with using this command.

 Command Line    To run a program on a server, type

 net run command

 You can use redirections to take input from or send output to a different
 location. For information about redirection, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).

 See Net Run, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Disconnecting from a Shared Directory

 You can disconnect your workstation from a shared directory when you are
 finished using a resource or when you want to use the devicename for a
 different connection.

   To disconnect your workstation from a shared directory:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The "Resources in Use by username at \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 3.3) appears.

   2.  In the list box, select the shared directory that you want to
       disconnect your workstation from.

   3.  Choose <Stop using>.

   4.  When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To disconnect your workstation from a shared directory,
 type

 net use devicename /delete

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Using Home Directories

 Your administrator may have set aside a directory on a server for your
 personal use. This is your home directory.

 Your home directory is on a server with your username as the sharename. You
 can use this directory to create and copy files, create and remove
 subdirectories, and do anything else that you ordinarily do with a directory
 on your own computer. You can also set LAN Manager permissions on files and
 subdirectories, allowing other people to use the contents of your home
 directory. Your administrator can override the permissions you set, since
 your home directory is part of the server's disk drive. Your administrator
 also sets a limit on how much disk space you can use for your home
 directory.

 To display the name of your home directory, choose Your account from the
 Accounts menu.

 For information about permissions, see Net Access in Part 3, "User's Command
 Reference."






 Chapter 4  Using Shared Printers
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 With LAN Manager, you can print files by sending them from your workstation
 to shared printers. This chapter explains shared printer queues and how to
 view, connect to, control, and disconnect from a printer queue. Procedures
 are provided for using a printer queue and for finding out which printer
 queues your workstation is using.


 Printer Queues

 A shared printer is one that is available to network users on a server. LAN
 Manager uses printer queues to hold print jobs. Figure 4.1 shows how jobs
 sent to a printer queue are printed one by one, usually in the order that
 the queue receives them.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 Printer queues can be set up in different ways: one printer can handle jobs
 from several queues, or one queue can send jobs to several similar printers.


 If a single printer receives jobs from several queues, the queues can have
 different priorities for printing. The printer might receive jobs from a
 low-priority queue that accepts jobs from all network users and also from a
 high-priority queue that accepts jobs only from users who need files printed
 quickly.

 If several printers receive jobs from a single queue, the server controlling
 the queue informs users which device printed their jobs.

 If the Messenger and Netpopup services are running on your workstation, a
 message is displayed when the print job is printed.


 Using the Print Manager

 You can view the contents of shared printer queues and control print jobs
 with the MS OS/2 Print Manager, in addition to using the LAN Manager Screen
 or command-line commands.

 The Print Manager controls printing at your computer. With LAN Manager, it
 also displays the network paths of shared queues to which your workstation
 is connected. For information about using the Print Manager, see Appendix B,
 "Using the MS OS/2 Print Manager with LAN Manager," and your MS OS/2
 manual(s).


 Viewing Printer Queues and Print Jobs

 You may want to view a list of available printer queues to determine where
 to send a print job or to monitor jobs that you have sent to a particular
 queue.

   To view printer queues and their print jobs:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the printer queue that you
       want to view.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Printer queues.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       For each queue, the name, number of print jobs waiting, and status of
       the queue are displayed.

       Each print job is identified with a line containing the username, job
       number (assigned by the server), size of the job (in bytes), and
       status of the job.

       Scroll through the list if necessary.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view printer queues and their print jobs, type

 net print \\computername

 See Net Print, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Connecting to a Printer Queue

 Connecting to a printer queue allows you to use the queue as if it were a
 printer attached to your computer. You connect your workstation to a printer
 queue by assigning a devicename to the queue. Devicenames LPT1: through
 LPT9: are available for printer queues.

   To connect your workstation to a printer queue:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the printer queue that you
       want to use.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Available resources.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The list box displays available resources at that server. Printer
       queues are listed as "Printer" in the "Type" column.

   3.  Select the printer queue that you want to use.

   4.  Choose <Use resource>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       LAN Manager provides the next available devicename, but you can supply
       a different one.

   5.  In the "Password" text box, type a password if needed.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

   7.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To connect your workstation to a printer queue, type

 net use devicename \\computername\sharename [password]

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."

 Spooled and Unspooled Queues - LAN Manager uses two types of queues to
 handle print jobs: spooled and unspooled. Spooled queues are identified with
 devicenames LPT1: through LPT9:. Spooled queues are used with printers and
 other devices that require no interaction.

 Unspooled queues are used with printers thatare configured with a serial
 interface. Unspooled queues are identified by devicenames COM1: through
 COM9:. If the queue you are using is attached to such a printer, use the net
 use command with the /comm option, for example:

   net use lpt4: \\finance\dotm /comm

 If you think that the printer you want to use is connected to a serial
 interface, see your administrator for more information.

 For more information about unspooled queues, see Chapter 5, "Using Shared
 Communication Devices."


 Connecting to a Printer Queue Without Setting the Focus

 The LAN Manager Screen allows you to connect your workstation to printer
 queues on servers other than the server of current focus. This includes
 servers that are not visible on the LAN Manager Screen and servers in other
 domains.

 LAN Manager also lets you connect your workstation to servers on the network
 that are not running LAN Manager. Because these servers have different
 interfaces, they do not appear on the LAN Manager Screen.

   To connect to a printer queue on a server other than the server of
 current focus:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 4.2 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Choose <Add use>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  In the "Type of Use" box, select the "Printer" option button.

       LAN Manager provides the next available devicename, but you can supply
       a different one.

   4.  In the "Network resource" text box, type the network path of the
       printer queue.

   5.  In the "Password" text box, type a password if needed.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

   7.  Choose <Done>.



 Making a Onetime Connection to a Printer Queue

 It is not necessary to assign a devicename to a printer queue if you need to
 print only one file. You can copy the file directly to a printer queue by
 specifying the network path as the destination of the net copy command.

 For example, if your current directory contains the PHONE.LST file and you
 want to send the file to the HOLES printer queue on the \\ADMIN server, type


   net copy phone.lst \\admin\holes

 LAN Manager connects your workstation to the printer queue and copies the
 file to the queue for printing. After copying, the connection is canceled.
 Note that this procedure will not work if a password is needed to gain
 access to \\ADMIN\HOLES. If so, you must first make a connection to the
 queue by assigning it a devicename.


 Viewing Your Connections

 You can view the printer queues to which your workstation is connected using
 the Print Manager or the LAN Manager Screen.

   To view your workstation's connections to printer queues:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The "Resources in Use by username at \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 4.2) appears. If you have a connection to a printer queue, you
       will see an LPT devicename under the "Device" column.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If a devicename was not assigned to a printer queue connection, the queue
 will not be displayed in the "Resources in Use by username at
 \\computername" dialog box unless the "Show deviceless uses" check box is
 marked. The Print Manager, however, displays all printer queues connected to
 the workstation regardless of whether a devicename was


   2.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view your workstation's connections to printer queues,
 type

 net use

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Printing over the Network

 Once a connection is made, you can use a printer queue as if a printer were
 attached to your computer. You simply direct the print output to the
 devicename that you assigned to the shared queue. Many application programs
 send their output to LPT1: by default.

 You can also send a file to be printed with MS OS/2 commands by using the
 devicename assigned to the queue in the syntax of the command, for example:


   copy report.doc lpt2:

 or

   print /d:lpt2 report.doc

 For more information about using the MS OS/2 copy and print commands, see
 your MS OS/2 manual(s).

 To print from a Presentation Manager application, you must do the following:



   ş   Connect to a shared printer queue. You must assign a devicename to the
       connection.

   ş   Set up a printer at your computer. The printer driver you specify must
       be the same as the printer driver used by the printer at the shared
       queue. Also, the printer you set up must be connected to the same
       devicename assigned to the shared queue. For information about setting
       up a printer, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).

   ş   Set up a print queue at your computer. The printer you select for the
       queue must be the printer you set up. For information about setting up
       a queue, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).


 After following these steps, you can print a job from a Presentation Manager
 application by specifying the queue you set up. The job will be printed at
 the shared printer queue to which you connected.


 Holding, Releasing, and Deleting a Print Job

 Holding a print job causes the server to suspend the job until you release
 it. Deleting a print job removes the job from the queue.

 An administrator can also hold, delete, or restart a print job if necessary.
 This can be done if a problem with the printer, such as a paper jam, caused
 printing to stop.

   To hold a print job:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the queue in which you
       have a print job.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Printer queues.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 4.3 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  In the list box, select the print job that you want to hold. Then
       choose <Hold>.

   4.  Choose <Done>.


 The job remains held until you release it.

   To release a print job:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the queue in which you are
       holding a print job.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Printer queues.

       The "Print Queues on \\computername" dialog box (Figure 4.3) appears.

   3.  In the list box, select the print job that you want to release. Then
       choose <Release>.

   4.  Choose <Done>.


   To delete a print job:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the queue in which you
       have a print job.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Printer queues.

       The "Print Queues on \\computername" dialog box (Figure 4.3) appears.

   3.  In the list box, select the print job that you want to delete. Then
       choose <Delete>.

   4.  When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.

       NOTE  You can also hold, release, or delete a print job from a printer
       queue using the MS OS/2 Print Manager.
 Command Line  

         To hold, release, or delete a print job:



   1.  Get the job number by typing

       net print {\\computername[\sharename] | devicename}

   2.  Take the desired action by typing

       net print {\\computername | devicename} job# {/hold | /release |
       /delete}


 See Net Print, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Disconnecting from a Printer Queue

 You can disconnect your workstation from a printer queue when you are
 finished using the resource or when you want to use the devicename for a
 different connection.

   To disconnect your workstation from a printer queue:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The "Resources in Use by username at \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 4.2) appears.

   2.  In the list box, select the printer queue that you want to disconnect
       your workstation from.

   3.  Choose <Stop using>.

   4.  When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To disconnect your workstation from a printer queue, type

 net use {devicename | \\computername\sharename} /delete

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."






 Chapter 5  Using Shared Communication Devices
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 With LAN Manager, you can use communication devices that are shared on the
 network. This chapter describes communication devices and
 communication-device queues. Procedures are provided for viewing, connecting
 to, and disconnecting from a shared communication-device queue.
 Additionally, how to send and delete a request to a shared
 communication-device queue is explained.


 Communication-Device Queues

 Communication devices,such as modems and image scanners, can be used by only
 one user at a time. LAN Manager uses communication-device queues (comm
 queues) to store requests for connections to shared communication devices.

 Comm queues submit your request to use a communication device, but your
 request is not transmitted until the communication device is available for
 use.

 To make an analogy, using a communication device is like using a telephone:
 many people can be in line, but only one person can use the phone, while the
 others must wait. This is different from using a printer queue, which is
 more like posting a letter. You can write and mail a letter, then go on to
 other tasks.

 While you are waiting to use the communication device, you can switch to
 another program and work on a different task.

 One communication device can handle requests from several comm queues, or
 one comm queue can use several similar communication devices.


 Viewing Communication-Device Queues

 You may want to view a list of available comm queues to determine which
 device you want to use.

   To view available comm queues:


   1.  Set the current focus on a server sharing comm queues.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Comm-device queues.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 5.1 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The "Users ahead" column displays the number of requests preceding
       your job in the queue. The "Users queued" column displays the number
       of requests in the queue.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view available comm queues, type

 net comm \\computername

 See Net Comm, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Connecting to a Communication-Device Queue

 Connecting to a comm queue allows you to use a communication device. You
 connect your workstation to a comm queue by assigning a devicename to the
 queue. Devicenames COM1: through COM9: are available.

   To connect your workstation to a comm queue:


   1.  Set the focus on the server sharing the comm queue that you want to
       use.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Available resources.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The "Sharename" column displays available resources at that server.
       The "Type" column tells you the type of resource that is available.
       Comm queues are listed as "Comm."

   3.  Select the sharename that you want to use.

   4.  Choose <Use resource>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       LAN Manager provides the next available devicename, but you can type a
       different devicename.

   5.  In the "Password" text box, type a password if needed.

   6.  Choose <OK>.

   7.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To connect your workstation to a comm queue, type

 net use devicename \\computername\sharename [password]

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Sending a Request to a Communication-Device Queue

 Once a connection to a comm queue has been made, you can use the
 communication device as if it were attached to your computer. To use a
 communication device, you submit a request to a comm queue through an
 application program. Be sure your application directs its output to the
 correct devicename. Many applications send their output to COM1: by default.
 When the device is free, the server connects your workstation to the
 communication device.

 You cannot use the current session for other tasks while a request is
 pending. But you can switch to another MS OS/2 session and work on another
 task.


 Viewing Your Connections

 At any time, you can view comm queues connected to your workstation.

   To view your workstation's connections to comm queues:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 5.2 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       If you have a connection to a comm queue, you will see a COM
       devicename under the "Device" column.

   2.  Choose <Done>.
 Command Line  

         To view your workstation's connections to comm queues, type


 net use

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Viewing a Communication Request

 You can view the status of your communication request from another MS OS/2
 session.

   To view a communication request:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the comm queue that you
       want to view.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Comm-device queues.

       The "Comm-device Queues on \\computername" dialog box (Figure 5.1)
       appears. The "Users ahead" column displays the number of requests
       preceding your job in the queue. The "Users queued" column displays
       the number of requests in the queue.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view a communication request, type

 net comm \\computername

 See Net Comm, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Deleting a Communication Request

 If you don't need to use a communication device after submitting a request
 to a comm queue, you can delete your request. If you have other requests in
 the comm queue, they will be deleted also.

   To delete your communication request(s) in a comm queue:


   1.  Set the current focus on the server sharing the comm queue with your
       request in it.

   2.  From the View menu, choose Comm-device queues.

       The "Comm-device Queues on \\computername" dialog box (Figure 5.1)
       appears.

   3.  Select the comm queue from which you want to delete your request, then
       choose <Purge self>.

   4.  When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To delete your communication request(s) in a comm queue,
 type

 net comm {\\computername\sharename | devicename} /purge

 See Net Comm, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Disconnecting from a Communication-Device Queue

 You can disconnect your workstation from a comm queue when you are finished
 using the resource or when you want to use the devicename for a different
 connection.

   To disconnect your workstation from a comm queue:


   1.  From the View menu, choose Used resources.

       The "Resources in Use by username at \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 5.2) appears.

   2.  Select the comm queue from which you want to disconnect your
       workstation.

   3.  Choose <Stop using>.

   4.  When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To disconnect your workstation from a comm queue, type

 net use devicename /delete

 See Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."






 Chapter 6  Sending and Receiving Messages
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 With LAN Manager you can exchange messages with other network users. In
 addition, servers can send messages that inform you of conditions that
 require your attention or of print jobs that are finished.

 The Messenger service must be started to receive messages from other users
 and from servers on the network. Messages are stored in a message log.

 The Netpopup service displays messages as they are received. It displays a
 message box for one minute on your computer's screen. If the Netpopup
 service is not running, you can read your messages in the message log. If
 you are not running the Netpopup service or the Messenger service, you will
 not be able to read messages that your workstation receives. However, the
 workstation will emit a beep when a message arrives.

 This chapter discusses how to use the LAN Manager message exchange features.
 The procedures for sending a message or file, reading and managing your
 message log, and adding or deleting an alias are provided.


 Sending Messages

 The Messenger service does not need to be running for you to send messages.
 However, it must be running for your workstation to receive messages.

 You can send a message to an alias or to a domain. An alias is a unique name
 to which messages can be sent. A workstation can have three kinds of
 aliases:


   ş   A computername, which is added as an alias when the workstation is
       started

   ş   An alias added with the Message menu's Alias command or the net name
       command

   ş   A username


 A username is not necessarily included as an alias at a workstation. This is
 because an alias must be unique on the network, but a user can be logged on
 at more than one workstation at a time. If a user logs on at several
 workstations, the username will only be added as an alias to the first
 workstation at which the user logs on.

 A domain name is used like an alias for sending messages. Messages sent to a
 domain name are received by all workstations and servers that specify the
 domain as the workstation domain.

   To send a message:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Send a typed message.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The "Name" option button is selected.

   2.  To send a message to a user, in the "Name" text box, specify who is to
       receive the message.

       If you are sending to more than one user, separate the names with a
       space. If you want a copy of the message, you can specify your own
       alias.

   3.  To send a message to all users in a domain, select the "Domain" option
       button, and type the domain name.

   4.  In the "Message" box, type your message.

       Messages sent to all users in a domain cannot exceed 128 characters.

   5.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To send a message:


   ş   Send a message with one line by typing

       net send alias message

   ş   Send a message with multiple lines by typing

       net send alias message (line 1) message (line 2) [...]

       When you finish, press ENTER, then F6 (or CTRL+Z), then ENTER again.

   ş   Send a file as a message by typing

       net send alias <filename
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Limit your file to 4096 bytes, which is approximately one screen of text. If
 the file is larger, the message may not be



 See Net Send, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Reading Messages

 There are two ways to read messages: through the Netpopup service or through
 the message log.

 To receive messages, you must have the Messenger service running. If you
 want to see messages as they arrive, the Netpopup service must also be
 running.These services, by default, are started when the Workstation service
 is started.

 A message log is a file that stores message when they're received. The
 default message log file resides in the LANMAN\LOGS directory.


 Using the Netpopup Service

 When the Netpopup service is running, each new message is displayed in a
 message box on your screen. The Messenger service must be running for the
 Netpopup service to display messages.

 The following is a typical message box:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 To clear the box from the screen, press ESC. (Otherwise, the message box
 stays displayed for one minute, then disappears).

   To stop or restart the Netpopup service:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Log messages to file.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 6.1 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Mark or unmark "Enable message popups."

       An X in the check box means the Netpopup service is running. If an X
       is not displayed, the service is stopped.

   3.  Choose <OK>.

       NOTE  The Messenger and Netpopup services can also be stopped and
       started using the "Start a LAN Manager Service" and "View
       Configuration for Workstation \\computername" dialog boxes. For more
       information about starting and stopping services, see Chapter 7,
       "Customizing Your Workstation."

 Command Line  

         To stop or restart the Netpopup service, type


 net stop netpopup net start netpopup

 See Net Stop and Net Start, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Reading Your Message Log

 A message log is a file that stores the workstation's messages. By default,
 LAN Manager uses the MESSAGES.LOG file in the LANMAN\LOGS directory for the
 message log.

 If the workstation receives messages for more than one user or alias, all
 messages are stored in the same message log. New messages are appended to
 the log.

   To read your message log:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Read message log file.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       You can scroll through the list box to read your messages.

   2.  To delete the contents of the message log, choose <Clear log>. When
       prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To read your message log, you can use a text editor or type

 type [drive:path] filename | more

 The filename is the name of your message log. For more information about the
 type and more commands, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).


 Specifying a Different Message Log

 You can change the name of your message log.

   To change the name of your message log:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Log messages to file.

       The "Specify Message Log File" dialog box (Figure 6.1) appears.

   2.  In the "New file" text box, type the pathname of a new file, or use
       the "Contents of path" list box and the <Dir> command button to select
       an existing filename.

       If you do not specify a path, the new message log is stored in the
       LANMAN\LOGS directory. If you type a filename without an extension,
       LAN Manager attaches the .LOG extension.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To change the name of your message log, type

 net log [drive:path] filename

 See Net Log, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Stopping and Starting Message Logging

 You can stop and restart message logging.

   To stop or start message logging:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Log messages to file.

       The "Specify Message Log File" dialog box (Figure 6.1) appears.

   2.  Mark or unmark "Pause message logging."

       An X in the check box means that message logging is paused.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To stop or start message logging, type

 net log /off net log /on

 See Net Log, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Printing Messages

 Instead of storing your messages in a message log, you can print messages as
 soon as they arrive.

 Command Line    To print messages as they arrive, type

 net log devicename

 To resume storing messages in a message log, type

 net log [drive:path] filename

 See Net Log, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Using Aliases

 More than one person can receive messages at a workstation. Since only one
 user can log on at a workstation at any given time, you need to add an alias
 for each person using the workstation. However, you can't add an alias that
 is in use at another workstation.

 Aliases are deleted when the Messenger service is stopped. Therefore, each
 time that you restart the Messenger service, you'll need to add any aliases
 that you want on the workstation.


 Adding an Alias

 An alias can have as many as 15 characters.

   To add an alias to the workstation:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Aliases.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 6.2 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Choose <Add alias>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  In the "New alias" text box, type the new alias.

   4.  Choose <OK>.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To add an alias to the workstation, type

 net name alias /add

 See Net Name, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Deleting an Alias

 You can delete an alias on your workstation or an alias that is forwarded to
 your workstation.

   To delete an alias from the workstation:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Aliases.

       The "Aliases for Messaging" dialog box (Figure 6.2) appears.

   2.  In the list box, select the alias that you want to delete.

   3.  Choose <Delete>.

   4.  Choose <Done>.

       NOTE  You cannot delete the workstation's computername from the alias
       list.

 Command Line  

         To delete an alias from the workstation, type


 net name alias /delete

 See Net Name, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Forwarding Messages

 At times you may need to forward your messages to another alias. Messages
 must be forwarded to an alias on another workstation running the Messenger
 service. That workstation then receives and logs messages sent to the alias.


   To forward messages:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Aliases.

       The "Aliases for Messaging" dialog box (Figure 6.2) appears.

   2.  Select the alias whose messages you want to forward.

   3.  Choose <Forward>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   4.  Type the alias to which messages are to be forwarded.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 You cannot forward one alias to another alias on the same
 workstation.ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



   5.  Choose <OK>.

       The "Aliases for Messaging" dialog box (Figure 6.2) shows the alias
       receiving the forwarded messages in the "Forwarded to" column. On the
       workstation receiving the forwarded messages, the alias whose messages
       are forwarded appears in the "Name" column in the "Aliases for
       Messaging" dialog box.

   6.  Choose <Done>.

       NOTE  If you receive an error message telling you that the alias
       cannot be forwarded, it may be because you are logged on to more than
       one network. If you don't know whether you're on multiple networks,
       see your administrator.

 Command Line  

         To forward messages, type


 net forward alias1 alias2

 See Net Forward, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Stopping Message Forwarding

 There are two ways to stop message forwarding (without stopping the
 Messenger or Workstation services): by deleting the alias from the
 workstation receiving the forwarded messages or by stopping the forward for
 the alias.

 To stop receiving messages forwarded to an alias at your workstation, see
 the procedure for deleting an alias in the "Deleting an Alias" section,
 earlier in this chapter.

   To stop forwarding messages:


   1.  From the Message menu, choose Aliases.

       The "Aliases for Messaging" dialog box (Figure 6.2) appears.

   2.  Select the alias and choose <Unforward>.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To stop forwarding messages, type

 net forward alias /delete

 See Net Forward, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."






 Chapter 7  Customizing Your Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 LAN Manager provides several ways to manage workstation resources. This
 chapter describes how to automatically connect the workstation to a set of
 shared resources (using a profile). It also describes how to control and
 adjust services, and view your workstation's configuration.


 Using Profiles

 A profile is a file that automatically connects your workstation to a group
 of shared resources. (The group of connections is defined when you save the
 profile.) The connections are made when you load the profile.

 When you save a profile, LAN Manager records your workstation's current
 network connections under the profile filename that you assign. Later, you
 can load the profile and regain the connections.

 For example, you may have a task that requires you to use a particular group
 of shared resources. You can connect your workstation to the resources and
 save the connections in a profile. Any time you need to perform the task,
 you can load the profile rather than make the connections individually.

 A profile is created using either the Config menu's Save profile command or
 the net save command. A profile is loaded with the Config menu's Load
 profile command or the net load command. Profiles are stored in the
 LANMAN\PROFILES directory unless you specify otherwise.

 One profileÄNETLOGON.PROÄhas a special purpose. If NETLOGON.PRO exists, it
 is loaded by default whenever a user logs on at a workstation. It is useful
 to save the connections you most often make in NETLOGON.PRO.

 NETLOGON.PRO is created if you don't specify a filename with the Config
 menu's Save profile command or the net save command. NETLOGON.PRO is loaded
 if you don't specify a filename with the Config menu's Load profile command
 or the net load command.


 Creating a Profile

 You can create a profile at any time to save a set of connections. This
 gives you the flexibility of having a set of connections specific to a task.


   To save your current connections in a profile:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Save profile.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Filename" text box, type the profile name (if you do not type
       an extension, LAN Manager adds the .PRO extension).

       You can also use the "Contents of path" list box with the <Dir>
       command button to select a profile. This replaces the contents of the
       existing profile with the workstation's current connections. When
       prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To save your current connections in a profile, type

 net save [[drive:path] filename]

 See Net Save, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Loading a Profile

 You can load a profile to automatically connect your workstation to a group
 of shared resources.

   To load a profile:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Load profile.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Filename" text box, type the filename of the profile you want
       to load, or use the "Display files on" option and the "Contents of
       path" list box.

       If the profile is not in the workstation's LANMAN\PROFILES directory
       or in a directory on your computer's path, you must specify its full
       pathname. If you do not type a filename extension, LAN Manager assumes
       the .PRO extension.

   3.  Select one of the "Load options":

       ş   "Append to existing configuration" adds the profile's connections
           to your workstation's current connections.

       ş   "Replace existing configuration" replaces your workstation's
           connections with the profile's connections.


   4.  Choose <OK>.


 To view your new connections, from the View menu, choose Used resources.

 Command Line    To load a profile and view your new connections:


   1.  Load a profile by typing

       net load [[drive:path] filename]

   2.  View your new connections by typing

       net use


 See Net Load and Net Use, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Controlling Services

 LAN Manager services that can run on a workstation are


   ş   The Workstation service, which lets you use network resources.

   ş   The Messenger service, which lets you receive messages at your
       workstation.

   ş   The Netpopup service, which displays messages on your screen.

   ş   The Peer service, which allows you to share resources. This service is
       described in Chapter 8, "Using the Peer Service."



 Pausing the Workstation or Peer Service

 Pausing a service puts it on hold. Unlike stopping, pausing does not cancel
 connections or change settings.

 When you pause the Workstation service, you can use your computer's
 devicenames for local resources instead of network resources. For example,
 an LPT devicename might be assigned to a shared printer queue. By pausing
 the Workstation service, you can use the devicename for a printer attached
 to the LPT port on your computer.

 Pausing the Workstation service also pauses the Messenger and Netpopup
 services.

 Pausing the Peer service keeps a user from connecting to the workstation's
 shared resources. However, if a user has a connection to a shared resource
 (before the service is paused), he or she can use the resource after the
 service is paused.

   To pause the Workstation or Peer service:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Control services.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 7.1 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Select the service you want to pause.

   3.  Choose <Pause>.

   4.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To pause the Workstation or Peer service, type

 net pause service

 See Net Pause, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Continuing the Workstation or Peer Service

 Continuing the Workstation service restores network connections and
 reactivates the Messenger and Netpopup services. Continuing the Peer service
 restores the workstation's shared resources and lets a user connect to them.


   To continue the Workstation or Peer service:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Control services.

       The "LAN Manager Services" dialog box (Figure 7.1) appears.

   2.  Select the service you want to continue.

   3.  Choose <Continue>.

   4.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To continue the Workstation or Peer service, type

 net continue service

 See Net Continue, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Stopping Services

 Stopping a service removes software from your computer's memory. Depending
 on the service, stopping may also cancel connections and delete message
 aliases.

 You can stop just one service or all services. When you stop all services,
 you cannot use LAN Manager until you start the Workstation service.

 Stopping an Individual Service - Stopping a service has different effects,
 depending on the service:


   ş   Stopping the Workstation service logs you off from the network, stops
       the Messenger, Netpopup, and Peer services, cancels network
       connections, and deletes message aliases.

   ş   Stopping the Messenger service keeps your workstation from receiving
       messages.

   ş   Stopping the Netpopup service keeps your workstation from displaying a
       message box when a message is received.

   ş   Stopping the Peer service cancels any shared resources and cancels
       another user's connections to shared resources.
 

         To stop a service:



   1.  From the Config menu, choose Control services.

       The "LAN Manager Services" dialog box (Figure 7.1) appears.

   2.  Select the service you want to stop.

       If no status is displayed in the "Status" column, the service is not
       running.

   3.  Choose <Stop>.

       A dialog box similar to the following appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   4.  Choose <OK>.


 There is another way to stop the Messenger and Netpopup services:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Workstation options.

       The dialog box shown in Figure 7.2 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  Unmark the "Messenger" or "Netpopup" check box.

       When an X is not displayed, the service is stopped.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To stop a service, type

 net stop service

 See Net Stop, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."

 Stopping All Services - 

   To stop all LAN Manager services:


   1.  Set the current focus on your workstation.

   2.  From the Config menu, choose Stop LAN Manager services.

       The following message box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 LAN Manager displays a series of message boxes, telling you that your
 username is logged off from the network and that the workstation is stopped.



 Starting a Service

 You can start LAN Manager services with settings specified in the LANMAN.INI
 file or with settings that you specify.

   To start a service:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Control services.

       The "LAN Manager Services" dialog box (Figure 7.1) appears.

   2.  Select the service you want to start.

       If no status is displayed, the service is not running.

   3.  Choose <Start>.

       The "Start a LAN Manager Service" dialog box appears. Figure 7.3 shows
       the dialog box for the Messenger service.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   4.  Choose <OK> to start the service with LAN Manager default settings.

       To start the service with settings other than the defaults, see the
       "Adjusting Service Performance" section, later in this chapter.

   5.  Choose <Done>.


 Starting the Messenger and Netpopup Services - There is another way to start
 and stop the Messenger and Netpopup services:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Workstation options.

       The "View Configuration for Workstation \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 7.2) appears.

   2.  Mark the "Messenger" or "Netpopup" check box.

       When an X is displayed, the service is running.

   3.  Choose <OK>.


 Command Line    To start a service, type

 net start service

 See Net Start, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."

 Adjusting Service Performance - LAN Manager services are controlled by
 options, which have values that determine how the service performs. When you
 start a service, you can adjust the values of these options for as long as
 the service is running. When you stop and restart the service, LAN Manager
 restores the default settings for the options.

 Default settings are determined by an initialization file called
 LANMAN.INI,which is stored in the LANMAN directory. This file lists each
 option and its default value.

 You should always consult with your administrator before you adjust the
 value of an option.

 Service options are listed in the "Start a LAN Manager Service" dialog box
 and in each service's Net Start reference page in Part 3, "User's Command
 Reference."

   To adjust a service's performance:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Control services.

       The "LAN Manager Services" dialog box (Figure 7.1) appears.

   2.  Select the service you want to start.

   3.  Choose <Start>.

       The "Start a LAN Manager Service" dialog box appears. Figure 7.3 shows
       the dialog box for starting the Messenger service.

       The "Option" column displays the service's performance options. Each
       of these options corresponds to an entry in the LANMAN.INI file. The
       default values are displayed in the "Value" column.

   4.  To select an option, scroll through the list of options or, in the
       "Option" text box, type the name of the option you want to change.

   5.  In the "Value" text box, type the value for the option.

   6.  Choose <Set>.

   7.  To change another option, repeat steps 4, 5, and 6.

   8.  To return to the default settings, choose <Reset> for the specified
       option or <Reset all> for all options.

   9.  Choose <OK>.

      If an invalid value is specified, LAN Manager displays an error message
      and the "Start a LAN Manager Service" dialog box (Figure 7.3)
      reappears.


 Command Line    To adjust a service's performance when you start it, type

 net start service [options]

 See Net Start Messenger, Net Start Netpopup, Net Start Peer, and Net Start
 Workstation, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Getting Workstation Information

 LAN Manager displays the following information about your workstation:


   ş   Error messages

   ş   Performance statistics

   ş   Configuration information



 Reading the Error Log

 Your workstation receives an error message when a network operation fails.
 Error messages are stored in an error log called ERROR.SAV. When the
 Messenger and Netpopup services are running, error messages are displayed as
 they are received.

   To view the error log and get help with an error message:


   1.  From the Status menu, choose Error log.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box lists the service that encountered each error, the
       error message number, and the date and time the error occurred.

   2.  To learn more about an error message, scroll through the list to
       select the message, then choose <Zoom>.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  Choose <Done>.

   4.  To save the contents of the error log in the ERROR.SAV file, choose >.
       When prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

   5.  To clear the error log, choose <Clear>. When prompted for
       confirmation, choose <OK>.

   6.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view the error log and get help with an error message:


   1.  View the error log by typing

       net error [/count:number] [/reverse]

   2.  Get help with an error message by typing

       net helpmsg message#


 See Net Error and Net Helpmsg, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Viewing Performance Statistics

 Your workstation keeps a list of statistics about the number and types of
 tasks it performs.

 The following types of statistics are described:

 Network I/O's performed
   The number of times data was sent or received over the network.

 Network errors
   The number of errors related to network transactions.

 Bytes sent
   The number of bytes sent during transactions.

 Bytes received
   The number of bytes received during transactions.

 Sessions started
   The number of sessions that were opened from the workstation at network
   servers.

 Sessions start failed
   The number of sessions that failed to open.

 Sessions disconnected
   The number of times a server automatically closed a session from the
   workstation.

 Sessions reconnected
   The number of times the workstation automatically reopened a closed
   session.

 Connections made
   The number of connections made to shared resources.

 Connections failed
   The number of connections to shared resources that were canceled
   unexpectedly.

 Times buffers exhausted
   The number of times memory buffer sizes were exceeded.

   To view the workstation's list of statistics:


   1.  From the Status menu, choose Workstation statistics.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box displays the workstation's computername, the date, and
       the time when the statistics were last updated.

       The sessions reported in the dialog box are special kinds of
       connections that LAN Manager makes between your workstation and a
       server when you first gain access to one of the server's shared
       resources. The session continues as long as you're using any shared
       resource on the server.

       Listings are provided for Redirector (Workstation), Server, and
       Application (interprocess communication) performance.

   2.  To clear the list of statistics, choose <Clear statistics>. When
       prompted for confirmation, choose <OK>.

       This sets all statistics to zero, and changes the date and time to the
       current date and time.

   3.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view or clear the workstation's list of statistics, type

 net statistics workstation [/clear]

 See Net Statistics, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."


 Viewing the Workstation Configuration

 Your workstation configuration includes your username, your domains, the
 version of LAN Manager that you are running, and networks that you
 participate in.

   To view your workstation's configuration:


   1.  From the Config menu, choose Workstation options.

       The "View Configuration for Workstation \\computername" dialog box
       (Figure 7.2) appears. An X in the "Messenger" and "Netpopup" check
       boxes means that the services are running.

   2.  Choose <Done>.


 Command Line    To view your workstation's configuration, type

 net config workstation

 See Net Config Workstation, Part 3, "User's Command Reference."





 Chapter 8  Using the Peer Service
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 The Peer service gives your workstation many of the capabilities of a
 server. It lets you share resources with other users on the network and run
 MS OS/2 server applications, such as Microsoft SQL Server.

 This chapter describes the Peer service and explains its features.


 Introduction to the Peer Service

 A workstation running the Peer service functions as an equal to servers on
 the networkÄthus the name Peer. In fact, the terms "Server" and "Peer" can
 be used synonymously to start and control the Peer service. Your workstation
 also uses "Server" to identify the Peer service on LAN Manager Screen dialog
 boxes and on output from LAN Manager commands (such as net start).

 As with the Server service, the Peer service lets you


   ş   Share disk, printer, and communication-device resources

   ş   Use user-level or share-level security

   ş   Remotely administer your workstation's shared resources, user
       accounts, and groups

   ş   Run additional LAN Manager services (listed at the end of the chapter)


 To learn about managing these aspects of a server, see the Microsoft LAN
 Manager Administrator's Guide.

 There are some differences between a workstation running the Peer service
 and a server. The biggest difference is that the Peer service allows only
 one user at a time to connect to shared resources. This differs from a
 server, which allows multiple connections.

 Other differences are described in the following section.


 Peer Service Features

 The Peer service works much like the Server service, with the following
 differences:


   ş   The Peer service lets one user at a time connect to the workstation's
       shared resources. If a user tries to connect to a workstation running
       the Peer service while another user has a connection, an error message
       is displayed at the requesting user's workstation.

       With share-level security, you cannot access your workstation's shared
       resources if another user has a connection. With user-level security,
       you can always access your workstation's resources, provided you

   ş   Create a user account at your workstation with admin privilege and
       with the username matching the username entry of the LANMAN.INI file.

   ş   Log on with the username and password matching those in the user
       account.

       With user-level security, you can have access to your workstation's
       resources from only one remote workstation or server at a time. You
       will be denied access if you attempt to make a connection from one
       remote workstation or server while having an active connection at
       another.

   ş   The Peer service lets the workstation share one printer queue and one
       communication-device queue.

       This doesn't mean you are restricted to using just one printer and one
       communication device with the queues you set up. You can have a group,
       or pool, of similar devices served by one queue.

   ş   A printer queue shared with the Peer service can contain print jobs
       from you and one other user.

       A user can connect to the queue, submit a print job, then disconnect.
       Another user can then connect to the queue but cannot submit a job
       until the queue is empty.

   ş   There is no limit on the number of users who can use the Peer
       service's IPC$ resource.

       The IPC$ resource lets users run programs in the workstation's memory
       if the Netrun service is running. The IPC$ resource, which is shared
       by default when the Peer service is started, is available regardless
       of whether a user is connected to the workstation.

       The IPC$ resource also provides access for multiple users to
       distributed applications that use named pipes and mailslots. And it
       allows users to view your workstation's shared resources.

   ş   The workstation running the Peer service is "hidden" in a domain.

       By default, the srvhidden entry in the LANMAN.INI file is set to yes,
       meaning that the workstation is hidden. It is not displayed on the LAN
       Manager Screen or with the net view command.

       You can change this by specifying srvhidden=no in the LANMAN.INI file.

   ş   The Peer service does not use the console version of the LAN Manager
       Screen.

       The Peer service does not recognize the net console command.

   ş   Peer service sessions remain connected regardless of how long a
       connection is inactive.



 Installing and Starting the Peer Service

 The Peer service is installed with the Setup program when the workstation is
 installed. A default shared directory called PUBLIC is installed with the
 Peer service.

 The Peer service is started automatically when you start the Workstation
 service. It can be stopped with the net stop command or the Control services
 command on the Config menu.


 Using the PUBLIC Shared Directory

 When the Peer service is installed, LAN Manager creates a directory called
 C:\PUBLIC on your workstation. This directory is automatically shared every
 time the Peer service is started.

 The PUBLIC directory has these features:


   ş   The sharename of the C:\PUBLIC directory is PUBLIC. The server name is
       your workstation's computername.

       For example, if your computername is \\HENRYJ, the network path for
       the PUBLIC directory is \\HENRYJ\PUBLIC.

   ş   Users can read files, create new files and subdirectories, and run
       files in the PUBLIC directory.

       The default permissions for the PUBLIC directory are R (Read)), C
       (Create), and X (Execute).


 You can change permissions and other security features for the PUBLIC
 directory after it is installed, and share other resources. See the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.


 Additional LAN Manager Services

 When the Peer service is running, your workstation can run other services to
 control network functions. These services, which are installed with the
 Setup program, are stopped and restarted like other LAN Manager services:

 Alerter
   Alerts specified users about network events.

 Netrun
   Enables a user at another workstation to run a program in the processor of
   the workstation running the Peer service.

 Replicator
   Copies a master set of directories and files from a server to workstations
   running the Peer service and other servers that require the files and
   directories.

 UPS
   Provides protection against a power failure by maintaining an
   uninterruptible power supply (UPS).

 For information about using and configuring these services, see the
 Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.






 PART III  User's Command Reference
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This part describes each LAN Manager command that can be typed at the MS
 OS/2 prompt to perform network tasks.

 The commands are listed on separate pages in alphabetical order. Each
 reference page explains the purpose of the command, its syntax, comments
 about using it, examples of usage, and references to related topics.





 User's Command Reference
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This chapter provides a reference page for each LAN Manager command. The
 purpose and syntax of the command, as well as comments, examples, and
 cross-references, are provided on each reference page. Reference pages are
 arranged in alphabetical order.


 Abbreviating Commands

 The reference pages spell out all command and service names. If a command
 has an abbreviation, it is listed on the command reference page.You can
 abbreviate any command option by typing enough letters to distinguish it
 from the command's other options.


 Using /yes and /no Options

 Many LAN Manager commands require confirmation to complete a task. To
 expedite the task, you can append the /yes or /no option to the command.
 These options can be abbreviated /y and /n.

 For example, the net logon command logs you on to the network.A username and
 password must be supplied, and the Workstation service must be running
 before the command can complete the task. If you try to log on and the
 workstation service hasn't been started, LAN Manager will return the
 following prompt:

   The WORKSTATION is not started.
   Is it OK to start it?  (Y/N)  [Y]:

 You must type Y or press ENTER to proceed with the logon. To log on to the
 network and start the Workstation service without getting a prompt, use the
 /y option. For example:

   net logon chrisj daffodil /y


 Using Passwords with Commands

 Some commands require that you supply a password to connect to a shared
 resource. There are two ways to provide one:


   ş   Type the password on the same line as the command. For example, to
       provide the password petunia while assigning LPT1: to the PLOTTER
       shared printer queue on the \\ADMIN server, type

       net use lpt1: \\admin\plotter petunia


   ş   Type an asterisk (*) instead of the password. LAN Manager prompts you
       for the password. For example, type

       net use lpt1: \\admin\plotter *


       LAN Manager then displays this prompt:

       Enter the password for \\ADMIN\PLOTTER:

       When you type the password at this prompt, the letters are not
       displayed. This keeps the password confidential.



 Using Special Characters with Commands

 A computername, sharename, username, or groupname can contain an MS OS/2
 special character (for example, ^ or &). To type a name with a special
 character in a LAN Manager command, use the MS OS/2 escape character (^)
 before the character.

 For example, to log on with the username marksp and the password mrkt&dev,
 type

   net logon marksp mrkt^&dev

 The escape character is not needed when typing a special character in a LAN
 Manager Screen dialog box.


 Controlling a Screen Display

 Some commands (for example, net help start workstation /options) produce
 more than one screenful of text.

 To stop the display from scrolling, press PAUSE or CTRL+S.

 To resume scrolling, press any key.

 You can also use the MS OS/2 more command to scroll through one screenful at
 a time, for example:

   net help start workstation | more

 This displays one screenful of text. To display another screenful, press any
 key. For additional information, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).


 Using Commands in Batch Programs

 LAN Manager commands can be used in batch programs (.CMD files), such as
 STARTUP.CMD. For example, you can use commands to start the Workstation
 service, log you on to the network, or make network connections. Command
 options can also be included in batch programs. To avoid confusion, do not
 abbreviate command options.


 Command Summary

 The following list tells what each LAN Manager command does:

 net
   Starts the LAN Manager Screen.

 net access
   Displays or changes a user's permissions for a shared directory or file.

 net comm
   Displays information about shared communication-device queues or cancels a
   request to use a shared communication-device queue.

 net config
   Changes or displays settings for a service. (Individual reference pages
   are provided for net config peer and net config workstation.)

 net continue
   Reactivates services suspended with the net pause command.

 net copy
   Copies files from a source to a destination.

 net error
   Displays or clears error messages stored in the error log.

 net forward
   Routes incoming messages from one alias at your workstation to another.

 net help
   Provides a list of commands and topics for which you can get help, or
   provides help with a specific command or topic.

 net helpmsg
   Provides help with a LAN Manager error message.

 net load
   Loads a profile.

 net log
   Controls or displays information about message logging.

 net logoff
   Logs a user off from the network.

 net logon
   Logs a user on to the network and sets the username, password, and domain
   at a workstation.

 net move
   Moves files from a source to a destination.

 net name
   Adds or deletes an alias, or displays a workstation's list of aliases.

 net password
   Changes the password for a user account on a server or in a domain.

 net pause
   Pauses a LAN Manager service.

 net print
   Displays information about a shared printer queue or controls a user's
   print jobs.

 net run
   Runs a program or command on a server.

 net save
   Creates a profile containing the workstation's connections to shared
   resources.

 net send
   Sends a message or short file to one or more users on the network.

 net start
   Starts a LAN Manager service or displays services that are running.
   (Individual reference pages are provided for net start messenger, net
   start netpopup, net start peer, and net start workstation.)

 net statistics
   Displays or clears usage statistics for the Workstation or Peer service.

 net stop
   Stops a LAN Manager service.

 net time
   Synchronizes the workstation's clock with that of a server or domain, or
   displays the time and date for a server or domain.

 net use
   Connects a workstation to or disconnects a workstation from a shared
   resource, or displays information about workstation connections.

 net view
   Displays a list of servers or displays resources being shared on a server.

 net who
   Lists users logged on in a domain, at a server, or at a workstation. It
   also lists information about a user.







 Net
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net command starts the LAN Manager Screen.


 Syntax

 net [/mono]

 where

 /mono
   Improves the LAN Manager Screen on a computer with a monochrome screen
   display. Use this option if you have difficulty viewing the LAN Manager
   Screen on your computer.


 Comments

 After you type net, the LAN Manager Screen appears:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 From this screen, you can use menus and dialog boxes to perform network
 tasks rather than typing LAN Manager commands at the MS OS/2 prompt.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 The LAN Manager Screen            Chapter 2, "Getting Started"


 Net Access
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net access command displays or changes a user's permissions for a shared
 directory or file.


 Syntax

 net access [drive:pathname] [/add name:permission[ ...]]

 net access [drive:pathname] [/change name:permission[ ...]]

 net access [drive:pathname] [/grant name:permission[ ...]]

 net access [drive:pathname] [/revoke name:permission[ ...]]

 where

 drive
   Is the devicename for the directory on your computer if you are running
   the Peer service or the devicename assigned to the shared directory
   containing the resource with permissions you want to change.

 pathname
   Is the resource with permissions you want to change.

 name
   Is the username or groupname that is to gain or lose permissions.

 permission
   Is one to seven letters specifying the types of permission to be given to
   name for the resource.

 /add
   Creates a new set of permissions for a resource that has none assigned.
   You can type several name:permission strings separated by spaces. You must
   create a set of permissions for the resource before you can grant or
   revoke permissions. To keep control over the resource, give yourself P
   permission.

 /change
   Changes one or more users' permissions to use a resource. You can type
   several name:permission strings separated by spaces.

 /grant
   Assigns additional permissions to a resource's existing set. You can type
   several name:permission strings separated by spaces.

 /revoke
   Cancels one or more users' permissions for a resource. You can type
   several name:permission strings separated by spaces.

 To list resources that can be shared at a workstation running the Peer
 service and permissions for those resources, type net access without
 options.


 Comments

 Your administrator may have assigned you a home directory, which is a
 directory for your own personal use on a server. You can share a directory
 at your workstation with the Peer service. These directories and their files
 can be controlled so that only certain users can have access to them.
 Permissions control a user's access to a file or directory.Permissions are
 represented by the following letters:

 R (Read)
   Read and copy files, and view subdirectories.

 W (Write)
   Make changes to files.

 C (Create)
   Create files and subdirectories.

 X (Execute)
   Run a command or program.

 D (Delete)
   Remove files and subdirectories.

 A (Attributes)
   Set the physical file flags of the file.

 P (Permissions)
   Assign or alter permissions for a resource. Your administrator initially
   must give you this permission for a resource. Once you have it, you can
   use net access to assign permissions, including P, to other users or
   groups. If you create a new file or directory, be sure to assign yourself
   P permission. Otherwise, you will be denied further access to the
   resource.

 Controlling access is usually the job of an administrator. However, you can
 control access to resources at your workstation when running the Peer
 service. This discussion is for simple, limited use of the net access
 command. To learn advanced uses of net access, see the Microsoft LAN Manager
 Administrator's Reference.

 If a pathname is not supplied with the net access command, LAN Manager
 assumes you are changing permissions for the current directory. You can
 specify either the devicename connected to the resource or the network path
 of the resource. The following are some conditions under which you can
 specify a devicename:


   ş   If you're using the Peer service, specify the devicename on the
       computer on which the resource is stored.

   ş   If you're changing permissions on a resource at a server, use net use
       to assign a devicename to the shared directory in which the resource
       is stored. Then specify the devicename assigned to the shared
       directory.


 When you specify a drive (or pathname) with net access, you get information
 about a resource's current set of permissions. The display looks similar to
 the following:

   Resource  Permissions                  Permissions
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   D:\MASTERDIR
             BILLRA:RWCXDAP             *USERS:RWCDA
             *CORPOP:RWCDA

 This display lists the resource you specified, and a two-column list of
 usernames and groupnames who can use the resource. Groupnames are designated
 by an asterisk (*). Following each username and groupname is a list of
 permissions assigned to it.

 You must have P permission for the resource to get information about it with
 net access.

 If you create a new file or directory and want to assign permissions to it,
 first use the /add option to specify which users and groups will have
 access. Be sure to add yourself (with P permission), or you'll be denied
 subsequent access.

 Use the /grant and /revoke options to add and cancel permissions for users
 and groups. Use the /change option to change existing permissions for a
 resource.

 If you create a file in a directory with permissions, the new file inherits
 the directory's permissions. Use the net access command only if you want to
 change the file's permissions.


 Examples


   a.  To view the permissions for the shared directory connected to the G:
       devicename, type

       net access g:


   b.  To set P permission for yourself (your username is billph) and members
       of the corpcom group for the newly created REPORTS.DOC file in the
       PUBLIC directory on drive C shared with the Peer service, type

       net access c:\public\reports.doc /add corpcom:p billph:p


   c.  To add the user jamesro with read and write permissions to the users
       on your C:\PUBLIC\LISTS directory shared with the Peer service, type

       net access c:\public\lists /grant jamesro:rw


   d.  To change permissions for the user jamesro to execute and delete for
       your C:\PUBLIC\LISTS directory shared with the Peer service, type

       net access c:\public\lists /change jamesro:xd



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Connecting to shared resources    Net Use

 Shared resources, permissions,    Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 and user accounts                 Guide




 Net Comm
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net comm command displays information about shared communication-device
 queues or cancels a request to use a shared communication-device queue.


 Syntax

 net comm {\\computername[\sharename] | devicename}

 net comm {\\computername\sharename | devicename} [/purge]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server sharing the communication-device queue(s).

 sharename
   Is the name of a communication-device queue.

 devicename
   Is the name of the device at your computer connected to the
   communication-device queue. Devicenames COM1: through COM9: are available.

 /purge
   Cancels the workstation's pending requests at the specified
   communication-device queue.


 Comments

 When you specify the computername of a server with net comm, you get
 information about the queues at the specified server. LAN Manager returns a
 display similar to the following:

   Communication-device Queues at \\DATABASE
                Local
   Sharename    Devicename  Users ahead  Users waiting
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   MODEM1        com1             1            2
   MODEM2                                      0

 This display provides four kinds of information:

 Sharename
   The sharename of the shared communication-device queue.

 Local Devicename
   The devicename at your workstation that is assigned to the shared
   communication-device queue if a connection has been established to the
   queue.

 Users ahead
   The number of user requests ahead of yours in the communication-device
   queue. This column has a number in it only if you have established a
   connection to the queue.

 Users waiting
   The number of user requests in the communication-device queue.


 Examples


   a.  To view information about all communication-device queues on the
       \\DATABASE server, type

       net comm \\database


   b.  To view the contents of the MODEM1 queue on the \\DATABASE server,
       which is connected to your workstation's COM1: devicename, type

       net comm \\database\modem1


       or

       net comm com1:

   c.  To cancel your requests in the MODEM1 queue on the \\DATABASE server,
       which is connected to COM1:, type

       net comm \\database\modem1 /purge


       or

       net comm com1: /purge

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Communication devices             Chapter 5, "Using Shared Communication
                                   Devices"

 Connecting to a shared            Net Use
 communication-device queue

 Viewing a list of visible         Net View
 servers




 Net Config Peer
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net config peer command changes or displays settings for the Peer
 service.


 Syntax

 net config peer [options]

 where

 options are as follows:

     /alertnames:name[,...]
       Specifies one or more usernames to receive alert messages (such as a
       printer problem or full disk). Separate multiple name entries with a
       comma.

     /srvcomment:"text"
       Is a descriptive comment (the "Server comment") about the workstation
       running the Peer service. The comment can have as many as 48
       characters. Enclose the text in quotation marks.

 To display a list of configurable services, type net config without options.



 Comments

 The Peer service has many settings that can be set using the net start peer
 command. This reference page lists two of the settings you are most likely
 to use with the Peer service. For a complete listing of Peer service
 settings, see Net Start Server in the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
 Reference.

 Changes made with the net config peer command are only in effect for as long
 as the Peer service is running. When the service is restarted, LAN Manager
 uses the settings specified in the LANMAN.INI file or with the net start
 peer command to configure the Peer service.


 Examples


   a.  To see which services are configurable at your workstation, type

       net config


   b.  To display the current settings of the Peer service, type

       net config peer


   c.  To change your comment to "This is Becky's workstation," type

       net config peer /srvcomment:"This is Becky's workstation"



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 The Peer service                  Chapter 8, "Using the Peer Service"

 Changing settings when starting   Net Start Peer
 the Peer service


 Net Config Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net config workstation command changes or displays settings for the
 Workstation service.


 Syntax

 net config workstation [options]

 where

 options are as follows:

     /charcount:bytes
       Specifies the amount of data LAN Manager collects before sending it to
       a communication device. If /chartime:msec is also set, LAN Manager
       acts on whichever option is satisfied first. The range is 0-65535; the
       default is 16 bytes.

     /chartime:msec
       Specifies the number of milliseconds for which LAN Manager collects
       data before sending it to a communication device. If /charcount:bytes
       is also set, LAN Manager acts on whichever option is satisfied first.
       The range is 0-65535000; the default is 250 milliseconds.

     /charwait:sec
       Specifies the number of seconds LAN Manager waits for a communication
       device to become available. The range is 0-65535; the default is 3600
       seconds.

     /maxerrorlog:kbytes
       Specifies the maximum size in kilobytes of the error log file. The
       range is 2 to the total disk size; the default is 100 kilobytes.

     /othdomains:names
       Specifies other domains that the workstation belongs to (up to four,
       separated by commas). Servers visible in the specified domain(s) can
       be viewed at your workstation, and messages sent to the domain name(s)
       are sent to your workstation.

     /printbuftime:sec
       Specifies the number of seconds LAN Manager waits before submitting a
       print job from the MS-DOS command interpreter. The range is 0-65535;
       the default is 90 seconds.

 To display a list of configurable services, type net config without options.



 Comments

 Changes made with the net config workstation command are only in effect for
 as long as the Workstation service is running. When the service is
 restarted, LAN Manager uses the settings specified in the LANMAN.INI file or
 with the net start workstation command to configure the workstation.

 Changing the /printbuftime option can expedite printing through MS-DOS
 applications when using the MS-DOS command interpreter. This option sets the
 amount of time LAN Manager waits to close a print device. If print jobs are
 not processed quickly, the value of this option may be too high.


 Examples


   a.  To see which services are configurable at your workstation, type

       net config


   b.  To display the current settings of the Workstation service, type

       net config workstation


   c.  To change the amount of time the workstation waits to submit a print
       job through the DOS command interpreter to 10 seconds, type

       net config workstation /printbuftime:10



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Controlling and adjusting         Chapter 7, "Customizing Your
 services                          Workstation"

 Changing settings when starting   Net Start Workstation
 the Workstation service


 Net Continue
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net continue command reactivates services suspended with the net pause
 command.


 Syntax

 net continue service

 where

 service
   Is either workstation or peer.


 Comments

 The net continue command can be abbreviated as net cont.

 When a service is continued, it resumes running as it was when paused.
 Continuing the Workstation service reactivates connections to shared
 resources. Continuing the Peer service reactivates shared resources.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Pausing and continuing a network  Chapter 7, "Customizing Your
 connection                        Workstation"

 Pausing a LAN Manager service     Net Pause


 Net Copy
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net copy command copies files from a source to a destination.


 Syntax

 net copy source[+source[+...]] [/a | /b] [destination [/a | /b] [/v]]

 where

 source
   Specifies one or more files, directories, or devicenames to be copied. You
   can specify multiple files by separating filenames with a plus sign (+) or
   by using MS OS/2 wildcard characters.

 destination
   Specifies which file, directory, or devicename source will be copied to.
   You can use MS OS/2 wildcard characters to specify multiple files.

 /a
   Treats the source or destination as ASCII text.

 /b
   Treats the source or destination as a binary file.

 /v
   Verifies that information was properly recorded on the destination disk.


 Comments

 The net copy command is similar to the MS OS/2 copy command, but it is much
 faster for copying between directories on a server. You don't need to
 connect to shared directories to use the net copy command. LAN Manager makes
 the connections for you during the copy.

 The net copy command is usually used to copy files, but source can also be a
 directory (to copy all files in the directory), a devicename (such as A: to
 copy all files in the current directory of drive A), or the MS OS/2 con
 command (to copy what is typed at the keyboard). Also, destination can be a
 devicename (such as LPT1: to copy to the device connected to LPT1) or it can
 be a network path.

 If source is a filename, the file is assumed to be in the current directory
 on the current drive.

 If destination is an existing file, the file is overwritten. If destination
 is a file that does not already exist, LAN Manager creates a new file. The
 new file is given the same name, creation date, and creation time as the
 source file.

 If a drive is specified as the destination, LAN Manager copies to the
 current directory on that drive. If no drive is specified, the source is
 copied to the current drive.


 Using the /a or /b Option

 The /a and /b options perform differently depending on whether they follow
 source or destination. The /a option is in effect in both cases until the /b
 option is specified.

 The /a option causes the file to be treated as ASCII text:


   ş   Placed after source, /a causes the copying to stop before the first
       end-of-file character.

   ş   Placed after destination, /a causes an end-of-file character to be
       added as the last character of the new file.


 The /b option copies the file in binary format:


   ş   Placed after source, /b copies all end-of-file characters.

   ş   Placed after destination, /b copies all but the last end-of-file
       character.



 Using the /v Option


   ş   The /v option verifies that each sector written on the destination
       disk is recorded properly. This slows down the net copy command.



 Example

 To copy the MAIL.DOC file from the LISTS directory on the \\SALES server to
 the ADDRESS directory on the \\SALES server, type

   net copy \\sales\lists\mail.doc \\sales\address

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Moving files                      Net Move

 MS OS/2 copy command              MS OS/2 manual(s)


 Net Error
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net error command displays or clears error messages stored in the error
 log.


 Syntax

 net error [/count:number] [/reverse]

 net error [/delete]

 where

 /count:number
   Displays the specified number of error messages (beginning with the oldest
   error message).

 /reverse
   Displays error messages in order of newest to oldest. Without this option,
   messages are displayed in order of oldest to newest.

 /delete
   Removes all entries from the error log.

 To display the contents of the error log, type net error without options.


 Comments

 This command can also be typed net errors.

 When a network operation fails, error messages are displayed at your
 workstation and are sent to an error log. You can get a more detailed
 explanation for an error message using the net helpmsg command. To get a
 quick listing of the most recent messages in the error log, use the
 /count:number and /reverse options together.

 The error log is stored in the LANMAN\LOGS\NET.ERR file. When the error log
 is full, no new entries are added until the contents of the file are removed
 with the /delete option.

 The size of the error log is specified by the LANMAN.INI file's maxerrorlog
 entry. You can change the size temporarily using the /maxerrorlog option of
 the net config workstation or net start workstation command.

 When you type net error without options, LAN Manager displays the entire
 error log in chronological order. You see a display similar to the
 following:

   Program         Message      Time
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   NETPOPUP        3151         04-07-90  04:03pm
     NET3151:  Unable to display message POPUP due to OS/2 VIO call error
     E3 01 01 00                                  ....
   WORKSTATION     3193         04-08-90  02:13pm
     NET3193:  A Virtual Circuit error occurred on the session to SALES
     The NCB command and return code is the data.
       96 18                                        ..

 For each error, LAN Manager reports the following information:


   ş   The LAN Manager service that encountered the error (under "Program").

   ş   The message number (under "Message") and text. To learn more about the
       error, use the message number with the net helpmsg command.

   ş   The date and time the error occurred (under "Time").

   ş   Information that is used to solve network performance problems.



 Examples


   a.  To display the entire error log in chronological order, type

       net error


   b.  To see the five most recent error messages your workstation has
       received, type

       net error /count:5 /reverse


   c.  To remove all entries from the error log, type

       net error /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Temporarily changing the error    Chapter 7, "Customizing Your
 log size                          Workstation"

 Permanently changing the error    Net Config Workstation
 log size

 Getting help with an error        Net Helpmsg
 message


 Net Forward
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net forward command routes incoming messages from one alias at your
 workstation to another.


 Syntax

 net forward alias1 alias2

 net forward alias1 /delete

 where

 alias1
   Specifies the alias for which messages are to be forwarded.

 alias2
   Specifies the alias to receive the forwarded messages.

 /delete
   Cancels forwarding for alias1; messages sent to alias1 are received
   locally.


 Comments

 This command can also be typed net for.

 The following rules apply to message forwarding:


   ş   You can forward messages to only one alias at a time. To change the
       alias for forwarding, you must use the /delete option to cancel
       forwarding for alias1, then specify a new alias2.

   ş   You can't forward messages that have been forwarded to your
       workstation. To stop receiving forwarded messages, use the net name
       command's /delete option. This removes the alias from your
       workstation.

   ş   Forwarded messages are logged at the receiving workstation if the
       Messenger service is running and message logging is on at that
       workstation.

   ş   If the receiving workstation stops, forwarding is canceled.


 The net name command shows you the aliases assigned to your workstation, and
 any aliases to or from which messages are being forwarded.


 Examples


   a.  To forward your messages (your alias is billph) to patma, type

       net forward billph patma


   b.  To change the forwarding so that your messages are forwarded to marysl
       instead of patma, first cancel forwarding to patma by typing

       net forward billph /delete


       Now forward your messages to the new alias by typing

       net forward billph marysl

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Messages                          Chapter 6, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Saving your messages in a file    Net Log

 Viewing, adding, and removing     Net Name
 aliases at a workstation

 Sending messages                  Net Send




 Net Help
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net help command provides a list of commands and topics for which you
 can get help, or provides help with a specific command or topic.


 Syntax

 net help [command [/options] | topic]

 net command {/help | /?}

 where

 command
   Is the command you need help with (don't type net as part of command).

 topic
   Is the topic you need help with.

 /options
   Describes the options available with the command.

 /help
   Provides an alternative way to display the help text for a command.

 /?
   Displays the syntax for the command.

 To view a list of commands and topics for which help is available, type net
 help without options.


 Examples


   a.  To view a list of commands and topics for which help is available,
       type

       net help


   b.  To view information about the net load command, type

       net help load


       or

       net load /help

   c.  To view the syntax for the net load command, type

       net load /?


   d.  To view the options available for the net error command, type

       net help error /options



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Getting help while using the LAN  Chapter 2, "Getting Started"
 Manager Screen


 Net Helpmsg
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net helpmsg command provides help with a LAN Manager error message.


 Syntax

 net helpmsg message#

 where

 message#
   Is the four-digit number of the LAN Manager message that you need help
   with.


 Comments

 When a network operation fails, you will see a message similar to the
 following:

   NET2182: The requested service has already been started.

 LAN Manager error messages are preceded by the letters "net" but you don't
 need to type net with message#.

 The net helpmsg command provides an explanation of why an error occurred and
 tells you what action to take to solve the problem.


 Example

 To get help with LAN Manager error message NET2182, type

   net helpmsg 2182

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Getting help while using the LAN  Chapter 2, "Getting Started"
 Manager Screen

 Getting help with LAN Manager     Net Help
 commands





 Net Load
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net load command loads a profile.


 Syntax

 net load [[drive:path] filename]

 where

 drive:path
   Tells where the profile is stored. Without a drive letter and path, LAN
   Manager assumes the profile is stored in the LANMAN\PROFILES directory.

 filename
   Is the name of the profile. If it has a .PRO extension, type only the name
   (without .PRO). If filename is omitted, the default profile, NETLOGON.PRO,
   is loaded.

 To restore connections made with the default profile, NETLOGON.PRO, type net
 load without options.


 Comments

 The net load command gives you an easy way to make connections to a set of
 shared resources by loading a profile.

 Loading a profile connects your workstation to the resources specified in
 the profile and cancels all existing connections. To see a list of your
 workstation's connections, use the net use command.

 A profile is created with the net save command, which records the
 workstation's current connections in a profile.

 If NETLOGON.PRO exists, LAN Manager automatically loads it each time that
 you log on to the network.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Profiles created on a workstation running the Peer service can contain
 information about Peer service shares and queue settings as well as
 workstation connections. When you load such a profile, LAN Manager restores
 the Peer service to the condition it was in when the profile was saved. If
 the Peer service isn't running when you load the profile, LAN Manager offers
 to start it for you.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Examples


   a.  To load a profile called BUDGET.PRO, type

       net load budget


   b.  To restore connections made with NETLOGON.PRO, type

       net load


       LAN Manager reminds you of the existing connections and asks whether
       you want to cancel them. Type Y to load NETLOGON.PRO.

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Using profiles                    Chapter 7, "Customizing Your
                                   Workstation"

 Creating profiles                 Net Save




 Net Log
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net log command controls or displays information about message logging.


 Syntax

 net log [[drive:path] filename | devicename] [/on | /off]

 where

 drive:path
   Tells where the message log is stored. Without a drive letter and path,
   LAN Manager assumes the file is to be stored in the LANMAN\LOGS directory.

 filename
   Is the name of the message log file. If it has a .LOG extension, type only
   the name (without .LOG). By default, messages are stored in the
   MESSAGES.LOG file.

 devicename
   Is the name of a device at your computer connected to a printer queue.
   Messages are printed as they're received. This name can be an LPT
   devicename (for parallel printers) or a COM devicename (for serial
   printers).

 /on
   Starts message logging.

 /off
   Stops message logging.

 To display information about message logging, type net log without options.



 Comments

 Message logging is on by default when the Messenger service is started.

 The net log command controls the way messages are saved. You can stop and
 start message logging, change the name of the file that stores the messages,
 or have messages printed as they're received.

 You can read the message log with the MS OS/2 type command.

 You can stop message logging with the /off option and still view messages if
 the Netpopup service is running. But if the Netpopup service is stopped and
 message logging is off, your workstation emits a beep when a message is
 received but neither displays nor logs the message.

 The default log file pathname is set by the logfile entry in the LANMAN.INI
 file. The pathname of the default log file can be changed temporarily using
 the /logfile option of the net start messenger command.


 Examples


   a.  To see whether message logging is on and learn the message log
       filename, type

       net log


   b.  To change the name of the message log file from MESSAGES.LOG to
       NOVEMBER.LOG, type

       net log november


   c.  To print messages directly to the printer attached to LPT1, type

       net log lpt1:



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Logging messages                  Chapter 6, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Starting the Messenger service    Net Start Messenger


 Net Logoff
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net logoff command logs a user off from the network.


 Syntax

 net logoff


 Comments

 The net logoff command removes a username and password at a workstation.

 Logging off does not stop the Workstation service. It simply ensures that no
 unauthorized person can use your username and password to gain access to
 shared resources.

 Logging off cancels all of a workstation's connections.

 You cannot log off if you are using a shared directory. Before using net
 logoff, you must change to a local drive on your computer.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Starting and stopping LAN         Chapter 2, "Getting Started"
 Manager

 Logging on                        Net Logon


 Net Logon
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net logon command logs a user on to the network and sets the username,
 password, and domain at a workstation.


 Syntax

 net logon [username [password | *]] [/domain:name]

 where

 username
   Is the name by which you identify yourself on the network (username can
   have as many as 20 characters).

 password
   Is the password for your account.

 *
   Produces a prompt for the password. The password is not displayed when you
   type it.

 /domain:name
   Logs you on in a domain other than your workstation domain. This domain is
   called the logon domain.

 To be prompted for a username and a password, type net logon without
 options.


 Comments

 The net logon command establishes your username and password at a
 workstation. These are used to log you on in a domain and grant you access
 to shared resources. Logging on also loads NETLOGON.PRO, the default
 profile, if it exists.

 Only one user can be logged on at a workstation at a time.

 You can use net logon to log on with another username or to log on in
 another domain, but you must first log off.


 About Usernames

 If you don't specify a username with net logon, a username is suggested.
 This username comes from the username entry of the LANMAN.INI file. If this
 entry is blank, the computername is suggested.


 About Passwords

 A password is a confidential word which, together with your username,
 establishes your identity and gives you access to resources. When you log on
 to the network or connect to a shared resource, your workstation sends your
 username and password specified with net logon to a server for verification.
 The server checks to see if it has an account for you and if the logon
 password you specified matches the password in your account. If so, you are
 given access. If not, LAN Manager asks you to supply the correct password.

 LAN Manager uses accounts two ways. In a domain, a server maintains an
 account for each user. Once you log on, you can use all the resources to
 which your account is granted access in the domain. Accounts are also used
 by individual servers to limit access to their resources.


 What Is a Domain?

 A domain is a group of computers on the network. Domains are set up by an
 administrator. If you don't specify a /domain:name, LAN Manager logs you on
 in your workstation domain, which is designated by the domain entry in the
 LANMAN.INI file.

 Your workstation domain probably includes the workstations and servers you
 most often work with. When you specify a /domain:name, you are logged on in
 a domain other than the workstation domain. This domain is called the logon
 domain.

 Servers visible in the workstation domain, the logon domain, and the domains
 listed in the othdomains entry of the LANMAN.INI file are displayed with the
 net view command. Your workstation will also receive messages sent to all of
 these domains.

 When you log on in a domain, you get access to most of the shared resources
 in the domain. Being logged on in one domain doesn't limit access to
 resources in other domains.


 Examples


   a.  To log on in your workstation domain, type

       net logon


       LAN Manager asks you for a username, then asks for a password.

   b.  To log on with the username felix and be prompted for a password, type

       net logon felix *


       You see the following display:

       Type your password:

       Your password is not displayed as you type it.

   c.  To log on in the accounting domain with the username felix and the
       password freddy, type

       net logon felix freddy /domain:accounting



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Logging on to and off from the    Chapter 2, "Getting Started"
 network

 Logging off                       Net Logoff

 Changing your password            Net Password


 Net Move
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net move command moves files from a source to a destination.


 Syntax

 net move source [destination]

 where

 source
   Is the pathname of one or more files to be moved. Specify multiple
   filenames by using MS OS/2 wildcard characters.

 destination
   Is the pathname to which source is moved. If more than one file is moved,
   destination must be a directory. If destination is omitted, files are
   moved to the current directory. LAN Manager won't overwrite an existing
   file during a move. If destination is an existing file, the move is
   canceled.


 Comments

 Use this command to move files between any two directories you have access
 to on the network.

 Moving a file is different from copying a file. Moving relocates the file;
 copying makes a duplicate. The moved file is given the date and time that
 the move occurred.

 You can move files between two remote computers. For instance, while working
 at workstation A, you can move files between servers B and C. You don't need
 to connect to shared directories to use net move. LAN Manager makes the
 connections for you.


 Example

 To move all files in drive C's TEXT directory to the BUDGET directory on the
 \\ADMIN server's REPORTS shared directory, type

   net move c:\text\*.* \\admin\reports\budget

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Copying files                     Net Copy


 Net Name
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net name command adds or deletes an alias, or displays a workstation's
 list of aliases.


 Syntax

 net name [alias [/add | /delete]]

 where

 alias
   Is the alias that you want to add or delete. An alias is a name to which
   messages can be sent.

 /add
   Adds an alias to the workstation. Typing /add is optional; typing net name
   alias performs the same task.

 /delete
   Removes an alias from the workstation.

 To display a list of aliases in use at the workstation, type net name
 without options.


 Comments

 A workstation can have three kinds of aliases, each receiving messages:


   ş   The workstation's computername, which is added when the Workstation
       service is started

   ş   Your username, which is added when you log on, provided you are not
       logged on elsewhere on the network

   ş   Aliases for messaging, which are added with net name or forwarded from
       another computer with net forward



 Receiving Messages

 Messages can only be received at a workstation if the Messenger service is
 running. If the Netpopup service is also running, a message box displays the
 message on your screen. If message logging is on, the message is sent to the
 message log. If the Netpopup service and message logging are both off, you
 will only hear a beep when your workstation receives a message. The message
 is neither saved nor logged in the message log.

 A workstation receives messages sent to any of its aliases or forwarded to
 any of its aliases with the net forward command. A user does not have to be
 logged on at the workstation for the aliases at the workstation to receive
 messages.


 Adding and Deleting an Alias

 You can't add an alias to your workstation that is already in use on the
 network. Similarly, you can't start the Workstation service with a
 computername that is being used as an alias at another workstation.

 You can log on with a username that is being used elsewhere as an alias, but
 the username isn't added as an alias to your workstation. Therefore, you
 will not receive messages for that username at your workstation.

 The /delete option is used to remove an alias or to stop receiving forwarded
 messages from another alias. You can delete any alias in use at your
 workstation except the computername.

 Logging off deletes your username alias. Other aliases at the workstation,
 including the computername, still receive messages as long as the
 Workstation service is running.


 Viewing Aliases

 When you type net name without options, LAN Manager displays a list of
 aliases in use at the workstation. You see a display similar to the
 following:

   Name            Forwarded To
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   ACCOUNTS
   JIMMYW          LESLIEJ
   LISAR           forwarded to you from EVERGREEN

 The "Forwarded To" column shows two types of forwarded aliases:


   ş   An alias to which messages are forwarded (LESLIEJ). It was forwarded
       from your workstation with net forward.

   ş   An alias from which messages are forwarded (LISAR). It was forwarded
       from another workstation with net forward.



 Examples


   a.  To view the list of aliases at your workstation, type

       net name


   b.  To add the alias juliewo to your workstation, type

       net name juliewo


   c.  To remove the alias juliewo from your workstation, type

       net name juliewo /delete


   d.  To stop receiving forwarded messages for the alias lisar at your
       workstation, type

       net name lisar /delete



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Messages                          Chapter 6, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Forwarding messages               Net Forward

 Saving your messages in a file    Net Log

 Sending messages                  Net Send


 Net Password
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net password command changes the password for a user account on a server
 or in a domain.


 Syntax

 net password [[\\computername | /domain:name] username oldpassword
 newpassword]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the server at which the password will be changed.

 /domain:name
   Specifies a domain other than the workstation domain in which the password
   will be changed.

 username
   Is your username.

 oldpassword
   Is your current password.

 newpassword
   Is the new password, which can have as many as 14 characters.

 To be prompted for the name of the domain or server, your username, old
 password, and new password, type net password without options.


 Comments

 User accounts are set up to control a user's access to shared resources on a
 server or in a domain. An account includes the username and password for a
 user.Accounts perform the same function on servers and in domains. The
 difference is that an account in a domain controls access to most of the
 resources shared on the servers in the domain, rather than just one server's
 resources.

 If you don't supply a \\computername or a /domain:name, LAN Manager assumes
 you are changing the password for your account in the workstation domain.


 Keeping Passwords Confidential

 To keep your password confidential, you can type an asterisk (*) instead of
 typing a password. You are then prompted for your password, which is not
 displayed as you type it. LAN Manager asks for the new password twice to
 ensure that it is correct.

 If you forget your password, see your administrator for a new one. You can
 then use net password to change the new password to one that you want.


 Examples


   a.  To change your password for the \\PRODUCTION server from rosebud to
       daffodil (your username is robertch), type

       net password \\production robertch rosebud daffodil


       To make the same change, but have LAN Manager ask you for a new
       password that won't be displayed when you type it, type

       net password \\production robertch rosebud *

   b.  To change your password in your workstation domain from tulips to
       daisies, type

       net password robertch tulips daisies


   c.  To change your account password in the accounting domain from magnolia
       to orchid, type

       net password /domain:accounting robertch magnolia orchid



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Passwords                         Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Logging on with a password        Net Logon


 Net Pause
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net pause command pauses a LAN Manager service.


 Syntax

 net pause service

 where

 service
   Is workstation or peer.


 Comments

 Pausing a service puts it on hold. The service and its connections are
 reactivated with the net continue command. Pausing a service differs from
 stopping a service, which cancels any connections or aliases associated with
 the service and removes LAN Manager software from memory.

 Pausing rather than stopping a service has the following advantages:


   ş   Pausing the Workstation service allows you to use a device at your
       computer instead of on the network.

       For example, your workstation's LPT1: devicename may be connected to a
       shared printer queue with a laser printer. If your computer's LPT1
       port is also attached to a dot-matrix printer on your desk, you can
       pause the network connection and print a quick draft on the dot-matrix
       printer. To send print jobs back to the shared printer queue, use the
       net continue command to continue the connection.

       Pausing the Workstation service keeps your username and password
       active. It also lets you continue connections without having to
       remember names of servers, shared resources, and passwords.

   ş   Pausing the Peer service keeps users from making any new connections
       to the resources shared with the Peer service. When the service is
       continued, new connections can be made.


 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 LAN Manager services              Chapter 1, "Overview"

 Continuing a paused Workstation   Net Continue
 service

 Stopping the Workstation service  Net Stop


 Net Print
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net print command displays information about a shared printer queue or
 controls a user's print jobs.


 Syntax

 net print {\\computername[\sharename] | devicename}

 net print {\\computername | devicename} [job# {/hold | /release | /delete}]


 where

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server sharing the printer queue(s).

 sharename
   Is the name of the printer queue.

 devicename
   Is the name of the device at your computer assigned to the queue.

 job#
   Is the identification number assigned to a queued print job. Job numbers
   are unique on the server.

 /hold
   Suspends a print job. A suspended job is not printed until the /release
   option reactivates it.

 /release
   Reactivates a job that is on hold.

 /delete
   Cancels a print job.


 Comments

 The net print command shows you where in a queue a print job is, and it lets
 you hold, release, or delete a job.

 Sending a job to a printer queue usually requires connecting to the queue
 with the net use command and then submitting the print job through an
 application program. But you can also send a job to a queue with the net
 copy or the copy command.

 When you specify a computername with net print (for example, \\SALES), you
 get information about the printer queues being shared on a server. You don't
 need to make a connection to a queue to get information about it. The
 display is similar to the following:

   Printer Queues at \\SALES

   Name                 Job#    Size     Status
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   LASER Queue         3 jobs            *Queue Active*
        JACKST            1     2509      Printing on LPT1
        JENNYT            3       75      Waiting
        JENNYT            4       75      Waiting
   PRT Queue           2 jobs             *Queue Active*
        BENST             5      180      Printing on LPT2
        JOHNOC            6      512      Waiting

 The columns of this display give the following information:

 Name
   The sharename of each printer queue. Listed beneath the sharename are the
   usernames of people who sent print jobs.

 Job#
   The number of jobs in each printer queue. Listed beneath the number of
   jobs is the unique identification number of each job in the queue.

 Size
   The size of each print job, in bytes.

 Status
   The status of either the printer queue or a print job.

 The status of a printer queue is controlled by an administrator. It can be


   ş   ActiveÄAvailable to receive jobs

   ş   HeldÄSuspended

   ş   Held untilÄSuspended until the time displayed

   ş   Pending deleteÄBeing shut down

   ş   ErrorÄUnavailable due to malfunction


 The status of a print job can be


   ş   Printing on devicenameÄPrinting on the printer attached to the
       server's devicename

   ş   SpoolingÄTransferring into the printer queue

   ş   WaitingÄWaiting for a printer to become available

   ş   HeldÄHeld by the user with the /hold option

   ş   Held on devicenameÄHeld because an administrator held the queue

   ş   PausedÄPaused by the user or an administrator

   ş   Out of paper on devicenameÄStopped because paper ran out

   ş   Error on devicenameÄStopped because of a malfunction

   ş   Offline on devicenameÄStopped because the printer is offline

       NOTE  If you can't find a particular queue with net print, the queue
       may be a communication-device queue. Type net view \\computername,
       where \\computername is the server sharing the queue, to see what
       "type" of queue it is. If it is a communication-device queue, use the
       net comm command to control your print jobs.



 Examples


   a.  To see the printer queues shared on the \\PRODUCTION server, type

       net print \\production


   b.  To learn about the DOTM queue on the \\PRODUCTION server, type

       net print \\production\dotm


   c.  If your computer's LPT1: devicename is connected to the \\PRODUCTION
       server's LASER queue, display the contents of the queue by typing

       net print lpt1:


       or

       net print \\production\laser

   d.  To cancel a print job with the job identification number 7 on the
       \\PRODUCTION server connected to your computer's LPT1: devicename,
       type

       net print lpt1 7 /delete


       or

       net print \\production 7 /delete

       See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Shared printers                   Chapter 4, "Using Shared Printers"

 Using a communication-device      Net Comm
 queue

 Copying a print job to a printer  Net Copy
 queue

 Connecting to a printer queue     Net Use

 Viewing servers and queues        Net View




 Net Run
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net run command runs a program or command on a server.


 Syntax

 net run command

 where

 command
   Is the name of the program you want to run. The program file must have a
   .EXE extension. You don't need to supply the filename extension.


 Comments

 The net run command lets you use another computer's processing power to run
 a program. You can do this only from the command line. There is no
 comparable command available through the LAN Manager Screen. You may need
 the help of your administrator to use this command.

 To run a program on a server:


   1.  Get the filename of the program you want to run and the computername
       of the server you want to use.

   2.  Connect to a shared directory on the server with the net use command.

   3.  Change your current directory to the shared directory.

   4.  Type net run followed by the filename of the program and any options
       or variables the program requires.


 If the program being run has options or variables that include filenames,
 specify the full pathname for each file. If a drive letter is included in
 the pathname, LAN Manager assumes it's one of the server's drives.

 Most programs produce some kind of output or data. When you use net run,
 this output is sent to your screen.To send the output to a file, specify a
 >pathname to receive the output in the net run command line. LAN Manager
 creates this file on the current directory.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The net run command cannot be used to run interactive programs such as word
 processors or spreadsheets.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Example

 Suppose you want to run a file-comparison program (with the command name
 diff.exe) on the \\ADMIN server with the LISTS shared directory.

 The two files you want to compare are MAILLIST.TXT and ADDRESS.LST, and the
 file you want to receive the output is NEWLIST.TXT on your drive C.

 To accomplish this, assign a devicename (such as D:) to the LISTS directory
 on the \\ADMIN server. Change to that drive, and start the program using the
 net run command. To do this, type the following:

   net use d: \\admin\lists

   d:

   net run diff maillist.txt address.lst >c:\newlist.txt

 You can perform other tasks at your workstation while the file-comparison
 program is running.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Connecting to a shared directory  Net Use

 Viewing a list of shared          Net View
 directories on a server





 Net Save
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net save command creates a profile containing the workstation's
 connections to shared resources.


 Syntax

 net save [[drive:path] filename]

 where

 drive:path
   Tells where the profile is stored. Without a drive letter and path, LAN
   Manager creates the profile in the LANMAN\PROFILES directory.

 filename
   Is the name of the profile. If filename is typed without an extension, a
   .PRO extension is added.

 To save your workstation's connections in the default profile, NETLOGON.PRO,
 type net save without options.


 Comments

 When you save a profile, LAN Manager creates a file that contains a record
 of your workstation's current connections. When the profile is loaded, LAN
 Manager makes the connections listed in the file.

 If you specify a profile that already exists, you see this warning message:


   This file already exists. Do you want to overwrite it? (Y/N) [N]:

 By saving separate profiles, you can conveniently make quick connections to
 sets of shared resources that you use only at certain times. Or, if others
 use your workstation, each user can have a personal profile.

 Another use of net save is to save connections temporarily if for some
 reason you must stop the Workstation service.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Profiles saved with the Peer service running can contain information about
 shared resources and queue settings as well as workstation connections. When
 you load such a profile, LAN Manager restores the Peer service to the
 condition it was in when the profile was created.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Examples


   a.  To save your workstation's current connections in NETLOGON.PRO, type

       net save


   b.  A coworker uses your workstation regularly, and she uses shared
       directories that you don't use. She saves her profile under the name
       jane by typing

       net save jane



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Profiles                          Chapter 7, "Customizing Your
                                   Workstation"

 Loading profiles                  Net Load


 Net Send
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net send command sends a message or short file to one or more users on
 the network.


 Syntax

 net send {alias | * | /domain[:name] | /broadcast} message

 where

 alias
   Is the username, computername, or other name to send the message to.

 message
   Is text of the message or the complete pathname of a text file (preceded
   by <) to be sent.

 *
   Sends the message to all aliases in your workstation domain.

 /domain[:name]
   Sends the message to all aliases in the workstation domain. If name is
   specified, the message is sent to all aliases in the specified domain.

 /broadcast
   Sends the message to all aliases on the network.


 Comments

 Use the net send command to send a message to a user, users in a domain, or
 all users on the network.

 An alias must be active on the network to receive a message, and the
 Messenger service must be running on the receiving workstation.

 The size of a message that a workstation can receive is limited. This limit
 is set with the sizmessbuf entry in the LANMAN.INI file.

 The simplest way to send a message is to type it from the command line. A
 longer message can be typed over several lines by pressing ENTER after net
 send alias and after each line of text, then pressing F6 and ENTER to send
 the message.

 LAN Manager provides several ways to broadcast a message (send it to many
 users).You can broadcast messages to all aliases in your workstation domain
 (use * or /domain), a different domain (/domain:name), or the entire network
 (/broadcast). Broadcast messages must be 128 characters or fewer. Use this
 feature with discretion.


 Examples


   a.  To send the message "Meeting changed to 3 p.m. Same place." to the
       alias jackst, type

       net send jackst Meeting changed to 3 p.m. Same place.


       Another way do this is to type

       net send jackst
       Meeting changed to 3 p.m.
       Same place.

       To send this message, press CTRL+Z or F6, then ENTER.

   b.  To send the small text file INVITE.DOC to all aliases in the legal
       domain, type

       net send /domain:legal <invite.doc


   c.  To inform everyone in your workstation domain that a party is being
       held in the cafeteria, type

       net send * There's a party in the cafeteria!



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Messages                          Chapter 6, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Forwarding messages to another    Net Forward
 alias

 Saving or printing messages       Net Log

 Adding aliases                    Net Name

 Using the Messenger service       Net Start Messenger


 Net Start Messenger
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start messenger command starts the Messenger service.


 Syntax

 net start messenger [/sizmessbuf:bytes] [/logfile:pathname]

 where

 /sizmessbuf:bytes
   Sets the size (in bytes) of the message buffer, limiting the size of
   messages the workstation can receive. The range is 512-62000; the default
   is 4096 bytes.

 /logfile:pathname
   Assigns a pathname for the message log file. The default message log is
   MESSAGES.LOG in the LANMAN\LOGS directory.

 To display a list of services that are running at the workstation, type net
 start without options.


 Comments

 The Messenger service must be started for the workstation to receive
 messages.

 A message is sent to an alias with the net send command. LAN Manager uses
 three types of aliasesÄa computername, a username, and an alias added with
 the net name command.

 There are two ways a workstation can receive messages sent to its aliases:


   ş   If the Netpopup and Messenger services are running, a message box
       displays each message on the workstation's screen.

   ş   If message logging is on, the incoming message is sent to a message
       log or a printer. The net log command controls message logging,


 Changes made with the net start messenger command remain in effect only as
 long as the Messenger service is running.

 If you're accustomed to using Microsoft Networks for MS-DOS version 1.0 or
 IBM(R) PC-LAN version 1.2, you can use /mbi:bytes instead of
 /sizmessbuf:bytes.


 Example

 To start the Messenger service with a message buffer size of 5 kilobytes
 (5120 bytes), type

   net start messenger /sizmessbuf:5120

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Messages                          Chapter 6, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Controlling network services      Net Continue, Net Pause, Net Stop

 Forwarding messages to another    Net Forward
 alias

 Logging messages                  Net Log

 Adding aliases                    Net Name

 Sending messages                  Net Send

 Starting the Netpopup service     Net Start Netpopup

 Starting the Workstation service  Net Start Workstation


 Net Start Netpopup
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start netpopup command starts the Netpopup service.


 Syntax

 net start netpopup

 To display a list of services that are running at the workstation, type net
 start without options.


 Comments

 The Netpopup service lets you see messages as they arrive at your
 workstation. The Messenger service must be running for the workstation to
 receive messages.

 The message display is similar to the following:

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The message box disappears after one minute or when you press ESC.

 If message logging is on, the message is saved in the message log. If
 message logging is off, messages are discarded after they're displayed.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Messages                          Chapter 6, "Sending and Receiving
                                   Messages"

 Controlling network services      Net Continue, Net Pause, Net Stop

 Forwarding messages to another    Net Forward
 alias

 Logging messages                  Net Log

 Starting the Messenger service    Net Start Messenger


 Net Start Peer
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start peer command starts the Peer service.


 Syntax

 net start peer [options]

 where

 options are as follows:

     /alertnames:name[,...]
       Specifies one or more usernames to receive alert messages. Separate
       multiple name entries with a comma.

     /maxshares:n
       Is the maximum number of resources that can be shared simultaneously.
       The range is 2-500; the default is 16 resources.

     /security:{user | share}
       Specifies whether user-level or share-level security is to be used.
       The default is user.

     /srvcomment:"text"
       Is a descriptive comment about the server. The comment can have as
       many as 48 characters. Enclose the text in quotation marks.

     /srvnets:name[,...]
       Lists one or more names of networks on which the server is available.
       Separate multiple name entries with a comma.

     /srvservices:service
       Lists the names of services to start with the Peer service. Separate
       multiple service entries with a comma. Service names cannot be
       abbreviated.

 To display a list of services that are running at the workstation, type net
 start without options.


 Comments

 You can abbreviate peer as server, peer_server, or ps.

 If the Workstation service is not yet started, you can type net start peer
 and any net start workstation option and start both services at once.

 The net start peer command has more options than are listed here, but to use
 them you must know how to manage a LAN Manager server. For more information,
 see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's Guide.

 You can use the Peer service in either of two ways:


   ş   If you're not concerned about security, you can make a shared
       directory available to anyone who wants to use it. A default directory
       is installed with the Setup program and has the sharename PUBLIC.

   ş   If you are concerned about security, you can learn how to control
       access to resources. You can also adjust the settings of the Peer
       service for best performance. At this point, you are the administrator
       of a server and should refer to the Microsoft LAN Manager
       Administrator's Guide.


 When you specify a net start peer option, you override the corresponding
 LANMAN.INI entryÄbut only until the Peer service is stopped. You can also
 temporarily change the following options while the Peer service is running,
 using the net config peer command:


   ş   /alertnames:names

   ş   /srvcomment:"text"



 Example

 To start the Peer service and have alert messages sent to johnsw, type

   net start peer /alertnames:johnsw

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 The Peer service                  Chapter 8, "Using the Peer Service"

 Changing settings while the Peer  Net Config Peer
 service is running

 Pausing the Peer service          Net Pause

 Stopping the Peer service         Net Stop

 Administering a server            Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Guide

 The LANMAN.INI file               Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Reference


 Net Start Workstation
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net start workstation command starts the Workstation service, optionally
 adjusting settings that affect the workstation's performance.


 Syntax

 net start workstation [options]

 To display a list of services that are running at the workstation, type net
 start without options.

 Command options are grouped into the following five categories:

 Names
   Assign a name to your computer or specify parts of the network you'll work
   with.

 Times
   Specify how long the workstation waits for events to happen.

 Sizes
   Allocate memory or disk space for the workstation's use.

 Services
   Specify which services start with Workstation service.

 Heuristics
   Adjust settings that determine how the workstation operates on the
   network.

 Each option corresponds to an entry in the [workstation] section of the
 LANMAN.INI file. When you specify a net start workstation option, you
 override the corresponding LANMAN.INI entryÄbut only until the next time
 that you start the workstation.

 Names

 /computername:name
   Is a unique name that identifies the workstation on the network. If the
   computername matches any of the following on the network, the workstation
   will not start:


   ş   A computername on anyone else's computer

   ş   A username on anyone else's computer

   ş   A domain name on the network

   ş   An alias on your computer or anyone else's


   Computernames can have 1-15 characters, including letters, numbers, and
   the following symbols:

   ! # $ % & ( ) - . @ ^ _ { }

 /domain:name
   Is the name of the workstation domain. The range is 1-15 characters.

 /othdomains:name[,...]
   Specifies one or more domains that the workstation belongs to (as many as
   four, separated by commas).

 /wrknets:names
   Specifies one or more networks in which the workstation participates.
   Networks are represented by LANA numbers 0-254 and are separated by
   commas.

 Times

 /chartime:msec
   Specifies the number of milliseconds for which LAN Manager collects data
   before sending it to a communication device. If /charcount:bytes is
   satisfied first, LAN Manager acts on that entry. The range is -1 (never)
   to 65535000; the default is 250 milliseconds.

 /charwait:sec
   Specifies the number of seconds that LAN Manager waits for a communication
   device to become available. The range is 0-65535; the default is 3600
   seconds.

 /keepconn:sec
   Specifies the number of seconds for which LAN Manager maintains a
   connection you're not using before breaking it. The range is 1-65535; the
   default is 600 seconds.

 /keepsearch:sec
   Specifies the number of seconds for which LAN Manager maintains a
   directory search request before discarding it. The range is 1-65535; the
   default is 600 seconds.

 /printbuftime:sec
   Specifies the number of seconds for which LAN Manager waits before
   submitting a print job from the MS-DOS command interpreter. Shortening
   this setting can expedite printing through MS-DOS applications. If print
   jobs are not processed quickly, the value of this option may be too high.
   The range is 0-65535; the default is 90 seconds.

 /sesstimeout:sec
   Specifies the number of seconds for which LAN Manager maintains a
   connection to a server that isn't responding. The range is 10-65535; the
   default is 45 seconds.

 Sizes

 /charcount:bytes
   Specifies the amount of data that LAN Manager collects before sending it
   to a communication device. If /chartime:msec is satisfied first, LAN
   Manager acts on that entry. The range is 0-65535; the default is 16 bytes.

 /mailslots:{yes | no}
   Determines whether the workstation can receive second-class mailslots and
   server announcements. The default is yes.

 /maxcmds:n
   Specifies the number of NetBIOS commands that LAN Manager can run
   simultaneously. The range is 5-255; the default is 16 NetBIOS commands.

 /maxerrorlog:kbytes
   Specifies the number of kilobytes for the error log on your hard disk. The
   range is 2 to the total disk size; the default is 100 kilobytes.

 /maxthreads:n
   Specifies the number of MS OS/2 execution threads that can use LAN Manager
   simultaneously. The range is 10-254; the default is 10 threads.

 /maxwrkcache:kbytes
   Specifies the amount of memory in kilobytes set aside for large transfers
   of data. The range is 0-640; the default is 64 kilobytes.

 /numalerts:n
   Specifies the number of program tasks that can wait for an alert
   condition. The range is 3-200; the default is 12 program tasks.

 /numcharbuf:n
   Specifies the number of character and pipe buffers that the workstation
   uses. The range is 0-15; the default is 10 buffers.

 /numdgrambuf:n
   Specifies the number of buffers available for receiving information
   (datagrams) from a server. The range is 8-112; the default is 14 buffers.

 /numworkbuf:n
   Specifies the number of buffers that the workstation uses. The range is
   3-50; the default is 15 buffers.

 /sizcharbuf:bytes
   Specifies the size in bytes of each character and pipe buffer. The range
   is 64-4096; the default is 512 bytes.

 /sizerror:bytes
   Specifies the size in bytes of the workstation's internal error buffer.
   The range is 256-4096; the default is 1024 bytes.

 /sizworkbuf:bytes
   Specifies the size in bytes of each workstation buffer. The range is
   1024-16384; the default is 4096 bytes.

 Services

 /numservices:n
   Specifies the maximum number of services that LAN Manager can run
   simultaneously. The range is 4-256; the default is 8 services.

 /wrkservices:service[,...]
   Lists LAN Manager services that start automatically when the Workstation
   service starts. Names are separated by commas and cannot be abbreviated.

 Heuristics

 /wrkheuristics:string
   Settings for fine-tuning the workstation's performance. For a description
   of each heuristic, see the Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
   Reference.

 If you're accustomed to using Microsoft Networks for MS-DOS version 1.0 or
 IBM PC-LAN version 1.2, you can use the following net start workstation
 options:

 /b:n or /nbc:n
   Sets the number of workstation buffers (same as /numworkbuf:n).

 /z:n or /nbs:n
   Set the size of the workstation's buffers (same as /sizworkbuf:bytes).


 Comments

 You can abbreviate workstation as wksta, work, redirector, redir, or rdr.
 You must start the Workstation service to use LAN Manager.

 You can temporarily change the following options while the Workstation
 service is running by using the net config workstation command:


   ş   /chartime:msec

   ş   /charwait:sec

   ş   /printbuftime:sec

   ş   /charcount:bytes

   ş   /maxerrorlog:kbytes


 When assigning a computername while starting the Workstation service, typing
 /computername: is optional; typing net start workstation computername
 performs the same task.


 Examples


   a.  To start a workstation with the computername \\FINANCIAL and the logon
       domain legal, type

       net start workstation financial /domain:legal


   b.  To start a workstation with the computername listed in LANMAN.INI but
       limiting the error log to five kilobytes, type

       net start workstation /maxerrorlog:5



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Starting LAN Manager              Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Changing settings while the       Net Config Workstation
 Workstation service is running

 Pausing the Workstation service   Net Pause

 Stopping the Workstation service  Net Stop

 The LANMAN.INI file               Microsoft LAN Manager Administrator's
                                   Reference


 Net Statistics
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net statistics command displays or clears usage statistics for the
 Workstation or Peer service.


 Syntax

 net statistics [workstation | peer] [/clear]

 where

 workstation
   Shows workstation statistics.

 peer
   Shows the workstation's Peer service statistics.

 /clear
   Clears the list of statistics.

 To display a list of services for which statistics are available, type net
 statistics without options.


 Comments

 You can abbreviate statistics as stats.

 The net statistics command provides information about how the Workstation
 service or the Peer service is performing.

 Statistics are recorded as the Workstation or Peer service performs an
 activity. LAN Manager clears the statistics for a service each time the
 service is stopped. Use the /clear option to begin a new set of statistics
 for all services.


 Workstation Statistics

 For Workstation service statistics, LAN Manager reports the workstation's
 computername, the date, and the time when the statistics were last updated.
 It also provides the following information:

 Network I/O's performed
   The number of times the workstation sent or received data over the
   network.

 Network errors
   The number of errors related to network transactions.

 Kilobytes sent
   The number of kilobytes sent by the workstation during transactions.

 Kilobytes received
   The number of kilobytes received by the workstation during transactions.

 Sessions started
   The number of sessions that were opened from the workstation at network
   servers.

 Session starts failed
   The number of sessions that failed to open.

 Sessions disconnected
   The number of times a server automatically closed a session from the
   workstation.

 Sessions reconnected
   The number of times the workstation automatically reopened a closed
   session.

 Connections made
   The number of connections made to shared resources.

 Connections failed
   The number of connections to shared resources that were canceled
   unexpectedly.

 Times buffer exhausted
   The number of times memory buffer sizes were exceeded.

 The sessions reported in the display are special kinds of connections that
 LAN Manager makes between your workstation and a server when you first gain
 access to one of the server's shared resources. The session continues as
 long as you're using any shared resource on the server.


 Peer Service Statistics

 For Peer service statistics, LAN Manager reports the computername of the
 workstation running the Peer service, the date, and the time when the
 statistics were last updated. It also provides the following information:


   ş   The date when the statistics log was last cleared

   ş   The number of sessions accepted and the number of sessions
       disconnected by an error

   ş   The number of bytes sent and received, and the average server response
       time

   ş   The number of errors and violations of passwords and permissions

   ş   The number of times shared files, printers, and communication devices
       were used


 For more information about the net statistics peer display, see Net
 Statistics in the LAN Manager Administrator's Reference.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Troubleshooting for your          Chapter 7, "Customizing Your
 workstation                       Workstation"

 Troubleshooting for the Peer      Chapter 8, "Using the Peer Service"
 service


 Net Stop
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net stop command stops a LAN Manager service.


 Syntax

 net stop service

 where

 service
   Is workstation, messenger, netpopup, or peer.


 Comments

 Stopping a service removes software from your computer's memory and cancels
 any network connections the service is using.

 This differs from pausing a service, which puts the service on hold and
 suspends any network connections. If you're using an application that
 requires a lot of memory, stopping some optional services can be helpful.

 Stopping a service has different effects, depending on the service:


   ş   When you stop the Workstation service, you are logged off from the
       network and your network connections are canceled. You may want to
       consider pausing the service to keep your connections intact or saving
       the connections in a profile using net save before stopping the
       Workstation service. That way, you can restore the same connections by
       using net load.

   ş   If you stop the Messenger service, your workstation won't receive any
       messages, and your workstation's message aliases are canceled.

   ş   If you stop the Netpopup service but keep the Messenger service
       running, messages are sent to your message log if message logging is
       on. (This is controlled with the net log command.) Otherwise, you
       won't receive messages.

   ş   When you stop the Peer service, your workstation stops sharing
       resources.


 To see which services are running at your workstation, type net start.

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 LAN Manager services              Chapter 1, "Overview"

 Loading profiles                  Net Load

 Saving profiles                   Net Save

 Starting services                 Net Start Messenger, Net Start Netpopup,
                                   Net Start Peer, and Net Start
                                   Workstation


 Net Time
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net time command synchronizes the workstation's clock with that of a
 server or domain, or displays the time and date for a server or domain.


 Syntax

 net time [\\computername | /domain[:name]] [/set]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server you want to check or synchronize with.

 /domain[:name]
   Displays the time and date at your workstation domain controller or
   synchronizes with that server. Use name to specify a different domain.

 /set
   Synchronizes the workstation's clock with that of the specified server or
   domain.

 To display the current date and time for the server designated as the
 network's official time source, type net time without options.


 Comments

 This command provides a way to check whether your workstation's clock is
 properly synchronized with the clocks at servers.


 Examples


   a.  To see the time and date for the domain controller of the accounting
       domain, type

       net time /domain:accounting


   b.  To set your workstation's clock to the time and date on the network's
       designated time server, type

       net time /set




 Net Use
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net use command connects a workstation to or disconnects a workstation
 from a shared resource, or displays information about workstation
 connections.


 Syntax

 net use [devicename] [\\computername\sharename [password | *]]

 net use printdevicename [\\computername\sharename [password | *] [/comm]]

 net use {devicename | \\computername\sharename} /delete

 where

 devicename
   Assigns a name to connect to the resource or specifies the device to be
   disconnected. LAN Manager uses three kinds of devicenames. Your computer's
   floppy disk drives use the devicenames A: and B:, and the hard disk has
   the devicename C:. If you have a second hard disk, RAM disk, or have
   partitioned your hard disk, devicename D: might be devoted to it. Shared
   directories can use the remaining letters of the alphabet as devicenames.
   Printer queues can use LPT1: through LPT9:, and communication-device
   queues can use COM1: through COM9:.

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server sharing the resource.

 sharename
   Is the name of the resource.

 password
   Is the password needed to use the resource. Type an asterisk (*) instead
   of the password to be prompted for the password. The password will not be
   displayed when you type it.

 printdevicename
   Is the name of a printer device.

 /comm
   Specifies that an LPT devicename is to be connected to a
   communication-device (unspooled) queue.

 /delete
   Cancels a network connection.

 To list the workstation's connections, type net use without options.


 Comments

 Connecting your workstation to a shared resource lets you use the resource
 as if it were attached to your computer.

 For example, net use can connect your workstation to a shared printer queue
 that uses a high-quality printer. When you use an application program, such
 as Microsoft Excel, you can print files on the printer by directing print
 jobs to the devicename assigned to the queue.

 You can also use the MS OS/2 Print Manager to send print jobs to a shared
 printer queue. You don't need to assign a devicename with net use to make
 the queue available to Presentation Manager application programs. The queue
 must be shared on a server using LAN Manager 2.0.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 You can use shared resources without making a connection with net use. The
 connection is made automatically by some network programs or by MS OS/2 when
 you specify the network path of the resource with a command. But if the
 resource is protected by a password, you must establish access with net use.
 You don't need to assign a devicename to establish access. Just type net
 use, the network path of the resource, and the password.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 You cannot delete a connection to a shared directory if it's your current
 drive or if it's currently used in another MS OS/2 session. You must first
 change to another drive.


 Viewing Your Workstation's Connections

 When you type net use without options, you get information about the
 workstation's connections. You see a display similar to the following:

   Status        Local name    Remote name
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   OK            M:            \\FINANCE\SCRATCH
   DISCONNECTED  G:            \\PRODUCTION\C
   ERROR         LPT1:         \\PRINT1\LASER

 The "Status" of a connection can be


   ş   OKÄThe connection is active.

   ş   DisconnectedÄThe connection is suspended by the server but will be
       reestablished when you use it.

   ş   PausedÄThe connection is paused by the workstation.

   ş   ErrorÄThe connection has ended and must be deleted.


 The "Local name" is the devicename assigned to the resource. "Remote name"
 is its network path.

 There are two ways to get information about a connection:


   ş   Type net use devicename.

   ş   Type net use and the network path of the resource. You must type this
       command twice; first to establish a connection to the resource, then
       to get information about it.


 Either method produces a display similar to the following:

   Local name       COM1
   Remote name      \\ACCOUNTING\LASER
   Resource type    Comm
   Status           OK
   #Opens           1
   #Connections     1

 "Resource type" is the type of resource being used (Disk, Comm, or Printer).
 "#Opens" is the number of files currently open on this connection.
 "#Connections" is the number of connections the workstations has to the
 shared resource.


 Using the /comm Option

 The /comm option assigns an LPT devicename to a communication-device queue.


 A communication-device queue sends jobs directly to devices using serial
 processing. When you send a request to a communication-device queue, the
 command that initiates the job will not begin until other users ahead of you
 in the queue are finished.

 By contrast, printer queues at a server "spool" print jobs to the server.
 When you send a print job to a printer queue, it is transferred to the queue
 and you can resume working at your computer.

 LAN Manager usually uses LPT devicenames to connect to printer queues. The
 /comm option tells LAN Manager that even though an LPT devicename is
 assigned, the connection is to a communication-device queue.


 Examples


   a.  To assign the devicename E: to the LETTERS directory on the
       \\FINANCIAL server, type

       net use e: \\financial\letters


   b.  To assign the devicename LPT1: to the LASER2 printer queue on the
       \\ACCOUNTING server, type

       net use lpt1: \\accounting\laser2


   c.  To disconnect from the LPT1: printer queue, type

       net use lpt1: /delete


   d.  To make the \\FINANCIAL server's MATRIX shared printer queue available
       for printing with Presentation Manager application programs, type

       net use \\financial\matrix


   e.  To disconnect from the \\FINANCIAL\MATRIX printer queue, type

       net use \\financial\matrix /delete


   f.  To establish access to the \\FINANCIAL server's SCRATCH shared
       directory, which requires the password tulips, type

       net use \\financial\scratch tulips


   g.  To assign the LPT1: devicename to the \\SALES server's DOT
       communication-device queue, type

       net use lpt1: \\sales\dot /comm



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Making connections                Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Restoring a set of connections    Net Load

 Pausing and continuing            Net Pause, Net Continue
 connections

 Saving your connections           Net Save

 Checking whether a printer queue  Net View
 is "Print" or "Comm"


 Net View
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net view command displays a list of servers or displays resources being
 shared on a server.


 Syntax

 net view [\\computername]

 where

 \\computername
   Specifies the server whose shared resources you want to view.

 To display a list of servers in your workstation domain, logon domain, and
 other domains, type net view without options.


 Comments

 When you type net view without options, you see a list of servers similar to
 the following:

   Server Name           Remark
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   \\PRODUCTION          Production file server
   \\PRINT1              Printer room, first floor
   \\PRINT2              Printer room, second floor

 When you specify a server with net view, you see a list of resources the
 server is sharing. The display looks similar to the following:

   Shared resources at \\PRINT1
   Printer room, first floor

   Sharename      Type   Used as  Comment
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   PRT            Print  LPT2     Printer pool
   FAST_PRT       Print  LPT1     High priority printer
   PORT           Comm            Shared Modem
   FAX            Comm   COM1     Fax machine
   D              Disk   R:       Drive D Root

 The columns give the following information:

 Sharename
   The name of the resource.

 Type
   The type of resource being shared.

 Used as
   The local devicename (if any) assigned to the resource.

 Comment
   An optional comment about the resource supplied by an administrator.


 Examples


   a.  To see a list of servers in your domain, type

       net view


   b.  To see a list of the resources shared on the \\PRODUCTION server, type

       net view \\production



 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Shared resources                  Chapter 2, "Getting Started"

 Using a resource shared on a      Net Use
 server


 Net Who
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Purpose

 The net who command lists users logged on in a domain, at a server, or at a
 workstation. It also lists information about a user.


 Syntax

 net who [/domain:name | \\computername | username]

 where

 \\computername
   Is the name of the server whose users you want information about.

 username
   Is the name of the user you want information about.

 /domain:name
   Lists users in a domain other than the domain in which you're logged on.

 To display information about users in the logon domain, type net who without
 options.


 Comments

 When you type net who without options, you see a list of users logged on in
 your logon domain. The display looks similar to the following:

   Users on Domain HEADQTRS

                              Time since
   Username    Workstation         logon    Full Name
   ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
   ABIGAIL     PRODUCTION       10:11:45    Abigail Martin
   ARNIEG      FINANCIAL        06:19:00    Arnold Gates
   PHILB       SALES            11:23:13    Phil Bates

 The "Workstation" column lists the computername of the user's workstation.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The net who command provides information about servers using LAN Manager
 version 2.0. Servers using previous versions of LAN Manager provide
 information about users connected to it only to users with administrative
 privileges on the server.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 Example

 To see a list of users in the headqtrs domain, type

   net who /domain:headqtrs

 See Also

 For information about             See
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Displaying a list of servers      Net View






 Appendix A  Menu Commands
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 This appendix gives a brief tour of the LAN Manager Screen. It describes
 information displayed on the screen and explains what you can do with each
 menu command.


 The LAN Manager Screen

 After you log on to the network using the LAN Manager Screen, the screen is
 displayed, as shown in Figure A.1.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The fields of the LAN Manager Screen provide the following information:

 Menu bar
   Displays the names of menus from which you can select menu commands.

 Current focus
   Shows the computername of your workstation or the server that is the focus
   of activity when using LAN Manager Screen commands.

 Workstation information
   Provides the following information about your workstation:

     Your username
       The username specified when you logged on to the network.

     Your computername
       The computername specified when the workstation was started.

     Your domain
       The name of your logon domain. This is the domain name specified when
       you logged on to the network. If you didn't specify a domain name, you
       automatically logged on in the workstation domain, which is specified
       in the LANMAN.INI file. Note that the workstation domain and the logon
       domain are the same if you logged on in the workstation domain.

 Servers in the logon and workstation domains
   Lists the servers in your logon and workstation domains.

 Scroll bar
   Lets you scroll through the servers in the list box with the mouse.

 Message line
   Provides a brief statement about the current menu, command, or task.


 View Menu

 The View menu commands let you view shared resources on the server of
 current focus, make connections to shared resources, view your workstation's
 connections, view information about users on the network, and exit the LAN
 Manager Screen.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the View menu commands:

 Available resources
   Displays the different types of resources available on the server of
   current focus. These resources include shared directories (disks),
   printers, and communication devices.

 Printer queues
   Displays the printer queues on the server of current focus and the print
   jobs in each queue.

 Comm-device queues
   Displays the communication-device queues on the server of current focus
   and the number of jobs waiting in each queue.

 Used resources
   Displays the resources that your workstation is connected to on the server
   of current focus. You can connect your workstation to resources shared by
   servers other than the server of current focus and by non-LAN Manager
   servers.

 Users on a server
   Displays the users that are logged on at the server of current focus.

 Users on a domain
   Displays the users that are logged on in a domain.

 Exit
   Removes the LAN Manager Screen.


 Message Menu

 The Message menu commands let you send, log, and read messages. You can also
 add and delete aliases and have your messages forwarded.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the Message menu commands:

 Send a typed message
   Lets you send a message to one or more users on the network.

 Log messages to file
   Lets you select the log file that stores your messages, pause and continue
   message logging, and enable or disable message popups.

 Read message log file
   Displays the messages in your log file.

 Aliases
   Displays the message aliases on your workstation. You can add message
   aliases to your workstation, delete message aliases from your workstation,
   and forward your messages to another user's alias.


 Config Menu

 The Config menu commands let you log on, log off, use profiles, view your
 workstation configuration, control LAN Manager services, and stop all
 services.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the Config menu commands:

 Log on to LAN
   Lets you log on to the network.

 Log off from LAN
   Lets you log off from the network.

 Load profile
   Displays the profiles that you can load to make automatic connections to
   shared resources.

 Save profile
   Lets you save a record of the workstation's current connections as a
   profile.

 Workstation options
   Displays information about your workstation's configuration, and stops and
   starts the Messenger and Netpopup services.

 Control services
   Displays information about LAN Manager services. You can start, stop,
   pause, and continue services.

 Stop LAN Manager services
   Disconnects your workstation from shared resources, logs you off from the
   network, and stops all services.




 Status Menu

 The Status menu commands let you view workstation statistics and the
 workstation error log.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the Status menu commands:

 Workstation statistics
   Displays information about your workstation's activities on the network.

 Error log
   Displays error messages received at the workstation.


 Accounts Menu

 The Accounts menu commands let you view information about your account and
 change your password.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the Accounts menu commands:

 Your account
   Displays information about your account.

 Change your password
   Lets you change your password at a server.


 Help Menu

 The Help menu commands let you access different types of online help.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The following list describes the Help menu commands:

 General help
   Describes the LAN Manager Screen and how to use it.

 Keyboard
   Tells how to use the LAN Manager Screen with the keyboard.

 Mouse
   Tells how to use the LAN Manager Screen with the mouse.

 Table of contents
   Displays a list of tasks you can perform with the LAN Manager Screen.

 Glossary of terms
   Displays an alphabetical list of terms and definitions used with LAN
   Manager.

 Using Help
   Explains how to use help.

 About LAN Manager
   Provides a brief description of LAN Manager.





 Appendix B  Using the MS OS/2 Print Manager with LAN Manager
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 With LAN Manager installed on your computer, several features designed for
 use with the local-area network are added to the MS OS/2 Print Manager.
 These features do not appear if LAN Manager is not installed.

 When the Workstation service is running and you are logged on to the
 network, Print Manager lets you view and work with printers and queues on
 the network as well as on your computer. Print Manager is used the same in
 both cases, but with LAN Manager, you can also


   ş   View and control print jobs in shared printer queues connected to your
       workstation.

   ş   Browse shared printers and queues in your workstation domain and other
       domains.

   ş   Specify whether information for network queues is refreshed in the
       Print Manager window and specify a time interval for refreshing.


 If you have admin privilege or print operator privilege at a server, you can
 remotely control shared queues and printers, and jobs in shared queues, with
 Print Manager.

 This appendix explains the Print Manager features that are available when
 LAN Manager is installed on your computer. For information about using Print
 Manager, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).


 The MS OS/2 Print Manager Window

 With LAN Manager installed, the Print Manager window looks almost the same
 as it does on a computer without LAN Manager.

 (This figure may be found in the printed book).

 The Print Manager window shows information about all shared printer queues
 to which your workstation is connected, as well as any local queues and
 printers. A shared queue is represented by its network path rather than a
 printer name. Note that if you connect to a shared queue without assigning a
 devicename to the connection, the queue is still displayed in the Print
 Manager window.

 When you print a file, you can select a shared queue for printing just as
 you select a local queue or printer. You can also control a shared queue in
 the same way you control a local queue, provided you have the necessary
 privilege at the server sharing the queue.

 With LAN Manager installed, some of the Print Manager menus are slightly
 different from those on a computer without LAN Manager.The following list
 shows the menus and commands for the Print Manager with LAN Manager
 installed.

 Queue menu

     Hold queue
       Suspends printing of all jobs from the queue(s) selected in the Print
       Manager window.

     Release queue
       Reactivates printing for the selected held queue(s).

     Cancel all jobs
       Removes all jobs currently in the selected queue(s).

 Job menu

     Job details
       Shows information, such as job name and priority, for the selected
       job(s).

     Cancel job
       Removes the selected job(s) from the queue.

     Print job next
       Puts the selected job(s) first in the queue.

     Start job again
       Stops the selected job(s) and repeats printing from the beginning.

     Hold job
       Changes the status of the selected job(s) so that printing is delayed
       until the job is released.

     Release job
       Releases the selected held job(s).

 Setup menu

     Spooler Path
       Changes the directory in which spooled print jobs are stored.

     Printers
       Adds, changes, or deletes a printer. You can also select a port, or
       one or more printer drivers, and you can set the options for the
       printer. You must be logged on at the workstation to use this command.

     Queues
       Adds, changes, or deletes a queue. You can also enter other settings
       that the printer driver will use, choose a queue driver, choose one or
       more printers, and choose a printer driver for the queue. You must be
       logged on at the workstation to use this command.

     Application defaults
       Identifies a default queue and a default printer for your
       applications.

 Refresh menu

     Refresh now F5
       Immediately updates the list of queues and jobs.

     Refresh interval
       Determines how often information for network queues in the Print
       Manager window is refreshed.

 Help menu

     Help for help
       Tells how to display help information and how to use the help window.

     Extended help
       Displays general help information.

     Keys help
       Tells how to use the keyboard with Print Manager.

     Help index
       Displays an index of topics for which online help is available.

     About
       Displays the version number of Print Manager.


 Using MS OS/2 Print Manager with Network Printers

 The following sections describe how to view, set up, and change settings for
 printers and queues using Print Manager.


 Viewing Printers

 Print Manager lets you see which printers are currently set up on your
 computer or on a remote server. It also lets you add a printer to the list,
 or change settings for a printer.

   To view printers:


   1.  From the Setup menu, choose Printers.

       The dialog box shown in Figure B.1 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box shows the names and descriptions of printers set up on
       your computer. The computername of your workstation is displayed in
       the "On Server" field.

   2.  To view printers on remote servers, choose Browse.

       NOTE  The Browse command button is active only when a user is logged
       on at the workstation.

       The dialog box shown in Figure B.2 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       The computername displayed in the "On Server" text box is from the
       "Printers" dialog box. The servers in the workstation domain and the
       workstation's other domains are displayed in the list box.

   3.  In the "On Server" text box, type the server's computername or, in the
       list box, select the server.

   4.  Choose OK.

       You may need to supply a password to gain access to the server if your
       logon password is different from the password in your user account at
       the server, or if the server is running share-level security. If a new
       password is needed, the dialog box shown in Figure B.3 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       If a new password is needed, in the "Enter Password" text box, type
       the password for the server you selected, then choose OK.

       The "Printers" dialog box (Figure B.1) appears, displaying printer
       information about the server you selected. From here, you can add,
       change, or delete printers at the server (provided you have the
       appropriate privilege), or browse other servers.

   5.  Choose OK.



 Setting Up a Printer

 Print Manager lets you set up printers to which you can send print jobs.
 Once you set up a printer, you create a printer queue for it. If you are
 running a server, the queue can then be shared using LAN Manager.

 The next two sections show how to set up a new printer and change existing
 printer settings.

   To set up a new printer:


   1.  From the Setup menu, choose Printers.

       The "Printers" dialog box (Figure B.1) appears. It lists the printers
       that are currently set up on the server.

   2.  Choose Add.

       NOTE  The Add and Delete command buttons are shaded (unavailable) if
       you have neither print operator privilege nor admin privilege.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  In the "Name" text box, type a name for the printer.

       The name can have as many as 255 characters.

       When users send jobs to the queue, the server sends a message telling
       when the job has printed. LAN Manager includes the printer's name in
       the message.

   4.  In the "Description" text box, type a descriptive comment.

       The comment can have as many as 48 characters.

   5.  In the "Device" text box, type the name of the port, or select it from
       the drop-down list.

       To display the drop-down list, click on the arrow to the right of this
       text box, or press ALT+DOWN (the down direction key).
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 If you want to use a COM port, be sure you first set up the port via the
 Options menu of the MS OS/2 Control Panel. (From the Options menu, choose
 Communications port to display the "Communications Port" dialog box. From
 there, select the COM port and its options, then choose
 Set.)ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


   6.  From the printer drivers list box, select one or more printer drivers
       that can be used with the printer, then choose Add.

       The last driver you select becomes the default driver (shown in the
       display field below the list box).

   7.  Choose OK.


 For more information about adding printers, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).


 Changing the Settings for a Printer

 The procedure for changing a printer's settings is similar to adding a new
 printer to your computer. If you want to change a printer's settings, such
 as its description or printer driver, use the following procedure.

   To change settings for a printer:


   1.  From the Setup menu, choose Printers.

       The "Printers" dialog box (Figure B.1) appears.

   2.  From the list box, select the printer, then choose Change.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  Follow steps 3-6 from the preceding procedure.

   4.  Choose Change.

   5.  Choose OK.



 Viewing Queues

 Print Manager lets you see which printer queues are currently set up on your
 computer or on a remote server. It also lets you add a queue and update
 queue settings. However, you cannot share a printer queue from Print
 ManagerÄuse the LAN Manager Screen or the net share command to share a
 queue.

   To view printer queues:


   1.  From the Setup menu, choose Queues.

       The dialog box shown in Figure B.4 appears.

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

       This dialog box shows the names and descriptions of queues set up on
       your computer. The computername of your workstation is displayed in
       the "On Server" field.

   2.  To view queues on remote servers, choose Browse.

       NOTE  The Browse command button is active only when a user is logged
       on at the workstation.

       The "Browsing Servers" dialog box (Figure B.2) appears.

       The computername displayed in the "On Server" text box is from the
       "Queues" dialog box. The servers in the workstation domain and the
       workstation's other domains are displayed in the list box.

   3.  In the "On Server" text box, type the server's computername or, in the
       list box, select the server.

   4.  Choose OK.

       You may need to supply a password to gain access to the server if your
       logon password is different from the password in your user account at
       the server, or if the server is running share-level security. If a new
       password is needed, the "Administrating Server" dialog box (Figure
       B.3) appears.

       If a new password is needed, in the "Enter Password" text box, type
       the password for the server you selected, then choose OK.

       The "Queues" dialog box (Figure B.4) appears, displaying information
       about queues on the server you selected. From here, you can add,
       change, or delete queues on the server (provided you have the
       appropriate privilege), or browse other servers.

   5.  Choose OK.



 Adding a Queue

 To create a printer queue, you can use either the LAN Manager Screen (or
 command-line equivalent) or Print Manager. Using Print Manager gives you
 more control over the queueÄyou can use the Job Properties command button to
 define more details about how the queue prints, specifying options such as
 font and paper size.

 After you create a printer queue with Print Manager, you can share the queue
 with the network using the LAN Manager Screen or the net share command. The
 shared queue retains all the options and properties you defined for it with
 Print Manager.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 Be sure to set up printers for your computer before creating the
 corresponding queues.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

   To create a new printer queue:


   1.  From the Setup menu, choose Queues.

       The "Queues" dialog box (Figure B.4) appears.

   2.  Choose Add.

       NOTE  The Add and Delete command buttons are shaded (unavailable) if
       you have neither print operator privilege nor admin privilege.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 NOTE

 The Setup command button is shaded (unavailable) if the queue is on a remote
 server (accessed via the Browse command
 button).ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


   3.  In the "Name" text box, type a name for the queue.

       The name for the queue can have as many as 8 characters with an
       optional 3-character extension. If the computer is using the
       high-perfomance file system (HPFS), the name can have as many as 255
       characters. However, if you want to share the queue, you should limit
       this name to 8 characters with an optional 3-character extension.

   4.  In the "Description" text box, type a descriptive comment.

       The comment can have as many as 48 characters.

   5.  In the "Queue driver" text box, type the name of the driver, or select
       it from the drop-down list. ("Queue driver" is another name for print
       processor.)

       To display the drop-down list, click on the arrow to the right of this
       text box, or press ALT+DOWN (the down direction key).

       For more information about installing new queue drivers through the MS
       OS/2 Control Panel, see your MS OS/2 manual(s).

   6.  In the "Separator" text box, type the name of the separator page file,
       if any.

       You can type DEFAULT.SEP to use LAN Manager's default separator page.
       Unless you specify a different path, LAN Manager assumes the separator
       file is in the C:\SPOOL directory.

   7.  In the "Priority" text box, type the priority for the queue.

       The range is 1-9; the default is 5. To set the highest priority for
       the queue, use 1.

   8.  In the "Scheduling" text boxes, if appropriate, type the hours during
       which jobs in the queue will be printed.

       By default, the text boxes are empty and jobs are printed on a 24-hour
       basis. If you want to limit the hours that print jobs are printed,
       type the times in the "from" and "to" text boxes. The time format
       depends on the country setting for your computer.

   9.  In the list box, select one or more printers that can be used with the
       new queue.

   10. In the "Printer Driver" text box, specify the default printer driver.

      Print Manager offers a default name. This is the first printer driver
      supporting the first printer for the queue.

      Select from the drop-down list if you want another default driver. To
      display the drop-down list, click on the arrow to the right of this
      text box, or press ALT+DOWN (the down direction key). If the selected
      printers have no drivers in common, the drop-down list is empty.

   11. Choose Job Properties if you want to customize settings for the
       default print driver.

      A dialog box specific to your default print driver appears.

   12. Choose Setup if you want to customize settings for the default queue
       driver.

      Another dialog box appears, allowing you to choose from among options,
      if any, for that specific driver.

   13. Choose Add.

   14. Choose OK.



 Changing Options for a Queue

 You can use Print Manager to change an existing queue's options, such as the
 name of a driver or separator page used with the queue.

   To change options for a printer queue:


   1.  From the Setup menu, choose Queues.

       The "Queues" dialog box (Figure B.4) appears.

   2.  From the list box, select a queue, then choose Change.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   3.  Follow steps 3-12 from the preceding procedure.

   4.  Choose Change.

   5.  Choose OK.



 Updating Information in the MS OS/2 Print Manager Window

 The Print Manager window shows activity on local and network printers and
 queues. You can choose whether to refresh information about network queues
 and, if so, how often. Information on local queues is refreshed regardless
 of network queues.

   To set how often information is updated:


   1.  From the Refresh menu, choose Refresh interval.

       The following dialog box appears:

       (This figure may be found in the printed book).

   2.  In the "Refresh interval" text box, type the number of seconds.

   3.  Choose Set.


   To update network information:


   1.  From the Refresh menu, choose Refresh interval.

   2.  Mark the "Refresh for network queues" check box.

   3.  Choose Set.


 Entries for network queues and jobs are updated each time the list is
 refreshed.






 Appendix C  Country Codes
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 A country code in a user account defines the language in which messages are
 sent from a server to a user. Messages such as print notifications and
 alerts are sent from a server to a user's workstation. The country code does
 not affect the language of error messages and explanation messages generated
 by the workstation itself.

 The following table lists available country codes. The default value for the
 country code is 0. If the default value is specified, messages are sent in
 the language used in the LANMAN\NETPROG\NET.MSG file.

ÖÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ·
 Country    Code  Country         Code
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Asia       099   Latin America   003

 Australia  061   Netherlands     031

 Belgium    032   Norway          047

 Canada     002   Portugal        351

 Denmark    045   Spain           034

 Finland    358   Sweden          046

 France     033   Switzerland     041

 Germany    049   United Kingdom  044
 Country    Code  Country         Code
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
Germany    049   United Kingdom  044

 Italy      039   United States   001

 Japan      081

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ









 Glossary
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Account
 See User account.

 Administrator
 The individual responsible for maintaining the local-area network. This
 person typically configures the network, maintains the network's shared
 resources and security system, creates user accounts, and helps users.

 Alert message
 A message sent by a server to a workstation that informs the user of
 conditions that require attention.

 Alerter service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a server to send error messages and
 special alert messages to a defined list of users. A workstation running the
 Peer service can also use the Alerter service to send messages to users. See
 also Peer service.

 Alias
 A name used to receive messages at a workstation. A workstation can have up
 to 15 aliases, including the computername and username. An alias must be
 unique on the local-area network.

 Application program
 A program used for a particular kind of work, such as word processing or
 database management.

 ASCII text
 A standard text file. See also Binary format.

 Batch file
 See Batch program.

 Batch program
 An executable program that contains a group of commands that are performed
 whenever the batch program is run. MS OS/2 batch programs always have the
 filename extension .CMD. A batch program called STARTUP.CMD runs when you
 start MS OS/2 .

 Binary format
 A series of binary digits (ones and zeros). See also ASCII text.

 Broadcast message
 A message sent to all users in a domain or on the local-area network. See
 also Messenger service.

 Buffer
 An area in a computer's memory that is used to store data.

 Check box
 An area in a LAN Manager Screen dialog box that has options you can set.

 Click
 To position the mouse pointer on a character, and press and release the left
 mouse button.

 Comm device
 See Communication device.

 Comm queue
 See Communication-device queue.

 Command
 An instruction that provides the necessary information for a computer or a
 program to perform a specific task. You type LAN Manager commands at the
 operating system prompt or choose them from a menu on the LAN Manager
 Screen.

 Command button
 A word or phrase enclosed in angle brackets at the bottom of the LAN Manager
 Screen or a dialog box (for example, <Zoom>> ). Choosing a command button
 carries out a task or leads to another dialog box.

 Command line
 The MS OS/2 prompt. See also Command and Prompt.

 Command option
 See Option.

 Comm-device queue
 See Communication-device queue.

 Communication device
 A piece of hardware that connects to a computer's serial port. Communication
 devices include modems, image scanners, and serial printers.

 Communication request
 A request to use a shared communication device. To use a shared
 communication device, a user sends a communication-device request to the
 appropriate communication-device queue.

 Communication-device queue
 An unspooled queue that stores communication-device requests, then sends
 them one by one to a shared communication device connected to a server's
 serial port. See also Communication device and Unspooled queue.

 Computer resource
 See Resource.

 Computername
 The name of a workstation or server on a local-area network. In a network
 path, a server's computername is preceded by two backslashes (for example,
 \\SALES). Computernames must be unique on the local-area network.

 Configurable services
 Services with options that can be modified to meet the necessary
 requirements.

 Configuration
 The way the workstation, server, or local-area network is set up, including
 both hardware and software.

 Connect
 To assign a name of a local device to a shared resource or to gain access to
 a shared resource with a LAN Manager command. See also Devicename and Shared
 resource.

 Connection
 The software link between a workstation and a shared resource. You make
 connections by assigning a local devicename on a workstation to a shared
 resource on a server. See also Session.

 Continue
 To restart a LAN Manager service that was paused. See also Pause.

 Country code
 A code that is included in a user's account and specifies the user's
 language. This code determines the language in which messages are sent from
 the server.

 Current focus
 The server or workstation that is the focus of activity when using the LAN
 Manager Screen.

 Cursor
 The lighted shape on the computer screen showing where the next character
 you type will appear. See also Pointer.

 Default share
 An optional feature of the Peer service that causes LAN Manager to
 automatically share a directory each time the Peer service is started.

 Device
 A piece of hardware that is attached to a computer and performs a specific
 function. There are three types of devicesÄdisks, printer ports, and serial
 communication ports. See Device driver.

 Device driver
 Software that enables a computer to recognize and use a device.

 Devicename
 The name of a device on your computer or the name of a device assigned to
 connect to a shared resource. The devicename is the name by which LAN
 Manager and your computer identify a communication device, disk device, and
 a printer device. Three types of devicenames are used for local-area network
 connections: communication devicenames (for example, COM1:), disk
 devicenames (for example, E:), and printer devicenames (for example, LPT1:).
 See also Communication device, Disk device, and Printer device.

 Dialog box
 A box that appears on the LAN Manager Screen when a menu command is
 selected. Dialog boxes typically present a number of options from which you
 can choose. Sometimes choosing an option from one dialog box causes another
 dialog box to appear.

 Directory
 A table of contents for a disk. The directory listing includes filenames,
 file sizes, and the date when the file was created or last modified.

 Disk device
 A device that stores information. Disk devices are identified by their
 devicenames. See slso Devicename.

 Disk directory
 See Directory

 Disk drive devicename
 See Devicename and Disk device.

 Domain
 A group of devices, servers, and workstations grouped together to simplify
 network administration and security. Domains have names and every computer
 on the local-area network belongs to at least one domain. Being logged on in
 one domain does not limit access to resources in other domains to which you
 have access. See also Logon domain, Other domains, and Workstation domain.

 Domain controller
 The server that verifies a user is allowed to log on in a domain. This
 server maintains a master record of user accounts.

 Double-click
 To position the mouse pointer on a character, and press and release the left
 mouse button twice with a quick motion.

 Drive
 A disk drive. See also Disk device.

 Drag
 To position the mouse pointer on the character that will begin or end your
 selection; press and hold down the left mouse button while moving your
 pointer to the other end of the desired selection; and release the left
 mouse button.

 Error log
 A file that stores LAN Manager error messages received by a workstation.

 Error message
 A message that appears on your computer screen after LAN Manager or MS OS/2
 detects a problem while trying to process an operation or command.

 Field
 One of the five areas within a dialog box. See also Check box, Command
 button, Dialog box, List box, Option button, and Text box.

 Filename
 A unique name for a file. Under the FAT file system, a filename can have as
 many as eight characters, followed by a filename extension. The filename
 extension consists of a period (.) and as many as three characters. Under
 the MS OS/2 1.2 high-performance file system (HPFS), a filename can have as
 many as 254 characters. See also Filename extension.

 Filename extension
 A period (.) and one to three characters that can be appended to a filename.
 For example, LAN Manager profile files have the extension .PRO. See also
 Filename.

 Forwarding messages
 See Message forwarding.

 Group
 A set of users who share common permissions for one or more shared
 resources.

 Groupname
 The name assigned by an administrator to a group of users.

 Hidden server
 A server that is part of a domain, but does not appear in the list of
 servers.

 Home directory
 A directory on a server that an administrator sets aside for your personal
 use.

 Initialization file
 The LANMAN.INI file. This file is used by the LAN Manager software to
 determine the default settings for the workstation. See also LANMAN.INI.

 Interactive program
 An application program that requires user input. See also Application
 program.

 Interprocess communication (IPC)
 The communication between different processes of a program, between
 different computers running parts of a single program, or between two
 programs working together.

 IPC$ resource
 An administrative resource that controls how interprocess communication
 works on a server and on a workstation running the Peer service. See also
 Interprocess communication.

 LAN
 See Local-area network.

 LAN Manager
 A software program that expands the features of MS OS/2 to enable your
 computer to join a local-area network. See also Local-area network.

 LAN Manager Screen
 A menu-oriented, full-screen interface for LAN Manager. With the LAN Manager
 Screen, you can use LAN Manager without having to memorize command syntax.

 LANMAN.INI
 An initialization file that determines default settings for computers on the
 local-area network.

 List box
 An area in a LAN Manager Screen dialog box containing a list of items from
 which you can select. See also Scroll, Scroll bar, and Scroll box.

 Local
 Refers to a resource attached to a user's computer. See also Remote.

 Local devicename
 The devicename at your workstation that is assigned to a shared queue. See
 also Devicename.

 Local name
 A devicename that you have assigned to a shared resource. See also
 Devicename and Network path.

 Local resource
 See Local.

 Local-area network
 A group of personal computers and other hardware, attached by cable, that
 lets users share information and equipment.

 Log
 A file containing a historical list of information. See also Error log and
 Message log.

 Log off
 To remove your username and password from a workstation and cancel
 connections to local-area network resources, but not stop LAN Manager
 services.

 Log on
 To supply your username and password, which identify you as a user at a
 workstation and as a member in a domain. See also Domain, Password, and
 Username.

 Logon domain
 The domain (other than the workstation domain) specified when you log on.
 See Domain, Other domains, and Workstation domain.

 Logon password
 The password specified when logging on. See also Password.

 Logon server
 The server that verifies your username and password when you log on to the
 network.

 Menu
 A box that appears when you select a name from the menu bar on the LAN
 Manager Screen. A menu lists several commands from which you can choose.

 Menu bar
 The horizontal bar at the top of the LAN Manager Screen that lists the names
 of menus from which you choose commands.

 Menu command
 A command that can be chosen from a menu on the LAN Manager Screen. See also
 LAN Manager Screen, Menu, and Menu bar.

 Message alias
 See Alias.

 Message box
 A box that displays messages received at a workstation when the Messenger
 and Netpopup services are running. See also Messenger service and Netpopup
 service.

 Message buffer
 A buffer used to hold incoming messages. The size of this buffer determines
 the size of messages that the workstation can receive. See also Buffer.

 Message forwarding
 To use aliases to reroute messages from one workstation to another. See also
 Alias.

 Message line
 A message line displayed at the bottom of the LAN Manager Screen that
 provides information about the current menu, command, dialog box, or task.
 See also LAN Manager Screen.

 Message log
 A file that can be used to store a workstation's messages as they are
 received.

 Message logging
 To save a workstation's messages in a file. See also Error log and Message
 log.

 Messenger service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a workstation to receive messages from
 other network users. This service also provides the ability to store
 messages in a log file. See also Netpopup service.

 MS OS/2
 Microsoft Operating System/2. This is the operating system on which LAN
 Manager runs. Workstations can also run MS-DOS.

 MS OS/2 prompt
 See Prompt.

 Named pipe
 A connection used to transfer data between separate processes, usually on
 separate computers. Named pipes are the foundation of interprocess
 communication (IPC). See also Interprocess communication and IPC$ resource.

 Netlogon service
 A LAN Manager service that implements logon security. This service verifies
 the username and password supplied by each user logging on to the local-area
 network.

 Netpopup service
 A LAN Manager service that displays messages on your computer screen as they
 arrive from other local-area network users or from LAN Manager. The Netpopup
 service requires that the Messenger service be running. See also Messenger
 service.

 Netrun service
 A LAN Manager service that lets users, from their own workstations, initiate
 and run programs on a server or on a workstation running the Peer service.

 Network path
 The computername of a server followed by the sharename of a shared resource.
 A server's computername is preceded by two backslashes (\\) and a sharename
 is preceded by one backslash (for example, \\SALES\REPORTS). You connect
 your workstation to a shared resource by specifying a network path. See also
 Computername, Resource, and Sharename.

 Network resource
 A resource that is available to local-area network users. See also Resource
 and Shared resource.

 Network security
 Security used to protect network resources from unauthorized access.

 Option
 Part of a command that determines how the command or service works, but
 which is not required.

 Option button
 A button in a LAN Manager Screen dialog box from which you can select one
 option from a group of options.

 Other domains
 Domains other than the logon and workstation domains in which your
 workstation is a member. See also Domain, Logon domain, and Workstation
 domain.

 Password
 A word that you supply when logging on at a workstation (the logon password)
 or connecting to a shared resource. The password, together with the
 username, establishes your identity on the local-area network. See also
 Logon password.

 Path
 The name of one or more directories (for example, REPORTS\ACCT\NORTH). See
 also Pathname.

 Pathname
 The name of one or more directories followed by a filename. For example, the
 pathname of the MONTHLY.RPT file in the REPORTS\ACCT\NORTH directory is
 REPORTS\ACCT\NORTH\MONTHLY.RPT.

 Pause
 To suspend a LAN Manager service. See also Continue.

 Peer service
 A LAN Manager service that enables an MS OS/2 workstation to share
 directories, a printer queue, and a communication-device queue with one
 local-area network user at a time.

 Permission
 A setting on a shared resource that determines which users can use the
 resource and how.

 Pointer
 A small graphic symbol that shows mouse users their location on the screen.
 The mouse pointer on the LAN Manager Screen is a small rectangular box.

 Pool
 A group of similar devices that receive requests from the same queue.

 Port
 A socket in the back of a hardware device (for example, a computer or modem)
 where a cable is plugged in.

 Print job
 A file sent to a printer queue to be printed.

 Printer device
 A device that prints information. Printer devices are identified by their
 devicenames. See also Devicename.

 Printer queue
 A queue that manages and routes print jobs to one or more printers connected
 to a server's serial or parallel ports. See also Spooled queue and Unspooled
 queue.

 Privilege level
 A privilege level is assigned for each user account. The privilege level
 defines the range of action a user has on the local-area network.

 Processor
 The portion of a computer's central processing unit that manipulates
 information.

 Profile
 A file containing LAN Manager commands that automatically connect a
 workstation to a group of shared resources.

 Prompt
 The symbol that tells you an operating system or program is ready to receive
 a command. You type commands at the prompt.

 Redirection
 Changing the default path of data traffic.

 Redirector
 The software used to route data traffic on the local-area network. See also
 Named pipe.

 Remote
 Refers to a server, workstation, or resource that is not located where you
 are currently working. See also Local.

 Remote computer
 See Remote.

 Remote program request
 A request for access to a program that is not resident on the computer where
 you are currently working.

 Remote name
 The network path used to connect a devicename to a shared resource. See also
 Devicename and Network path.

 Remote server
 See Remote.

 Replicator service
 A LAN Manager service that copies a master set of files from one server to
 other servers and to a workstation running the Peer service.

 Resource
 Something that is shared on the local-area network. This includes, but is
 not limited to, disks, directories, the server's processor, printers, and
 communication devices. See also Shared resource.

 Run
 To start a program or command.

 Scroll
 To move data or text up and down, or left and right, in a LAN Manager dialog
 box.

 Scroll bar
 The shaded bar that appears at the right of some LAN Manager Screen list
 boxes. Use the scroll bar and the mouse to scroll through a list box that
 contains more information than can be shown in one screen.

 Scroll box
 The small box superimposed on the scroll bar that appears at the right of
 some LAN Manager Screen list boxes. The scroll box reflects the position of
 the information within the window in relation to the total contents of the
 list. See also Scroll bar.

 Server
 A computer on a local-area network that controls access to resources such as
 files, printers, and communication devices. A server can also be used as a
 workstation.

 Service
 A program that is one of the main components of LAN Manager.

 Session
 A link between a workstation and a server. A session consists of one or more
 connections to shared resources. See also Connection.

 Setup program
 A program that installs LAN Manager software on a workstation or server.

 Shared communication device
 See Communication device.

 Shared communication-device queue
 See Communication-device queue.

 Shared directory
 A disk directory on a server to which users of the local-area network have
 access. A shared directory contains files that are available to network
 users.

 Shared printer
 See Printer queue.

 Shared printer queue
 See Printer queue.

 Shared resource
 A resource that is available to users of the local-area network. See
 Resource.

 Sharename
 A name that identifies a shared resource. See also Computername and Network
 path.

 Sharing
 The process by which resources are made available to local-area network
 users.

 Software
 The programs, routines, or instructions written in a computer language that
 instruct the computer to perform one or more tasks.

 Spooled queue
 A queue used with printers that are configured with a parallel interface.
 Spooled queues are identified with devicenames LPT1: through LPT9:. See also
 Devicename and Printer queue.

 String
 Any contiguous set of alphabetic and numeric characters that will be treated
 as a unit.

 Text box
 An area in a LAN Manager Screen dialog box where you type information. The
 text box may or may not contain text.

 Title bar
 The place at the top of the LAN Manager Screen or a dialog box where titles
 appear.

 Unspooled queue
 An queue used with printers that are configured with a serial interface.
 Unspooled queues are identified with devicenames COM1: through COM9:. See
 also Devicename and Printer queue.

 Uninterruptible power supply (UPS)
 A battery, attached to a server, that provides backup power for conducting
 an orderly shutdown if the server's normal power supply fails.

 UPS service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a server to use an uninterruptible power
 supply (UPS). The UPS service protects the server from data loss during a
 power failure.

 User
 Someone who uses the local-area network.

 User account
 A user's record on a server or in a domain that defines the hours during
 which the user can log on and controls the access that the user can have to
 resources in the domain.

 Username
 The name a user types when logging on to the local-area network. This is the
 name by which the user is identified on the network.

 Wildcard character
 A character, used with MS OS/2 directory commands, indicating that any
 character can occupy the position of the wildcard character. The wildcard
 characters are the asterisk (*) and the question mark (?).

 Workstation
 A computer with hardware and software that enable it to run LAN Manager.

 Workstation domain
 The domain into which a workstation is logged by default. Unless another
 domain is specified during logon, LAN Manager uses the workstation domain.
 See also Domain, Logon domain, and Other domains.

 Workstation resource
 A resource that is attached to or part of a user's computer (for example, a
 local printer). See also Local.

 Workstation service
 A LAN Manager service that enables a computer to use network resources and
 services. This service must be running for any other service to run.





 INDEX
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




     A
 Accounts menu
   Change your password command
   Your account command
 Accounts, user
   viewing your account
 Alerter service
 Aliases
   adding and deleting
   forwarding
   sending messages to
   viewing

     B
 Batch programs
   STARTUP.CMD
   using commands in

     C
 Clocks, computer
   synchronizing
 Comm devicenames
   assigning
 Comm ports
   use with printer queues
 Comm queues
    see Communication-device queues
 Commands, net
   net access
   net comm
   net config peer
   net config workstation
   net continue
   net copy
   net error
   net forward
   net help
   net helpmsg
   net load
   net log
   net logoff
   net logon
   net move
   net name
   net password
   net pause
   net print
   net run
   net save
   net send
   net start messenger
   net start netpopup
   net start peer
   net statistics
   net stop
   net time
   net use
   net view
   net who
   net
   working with commands
     abbreviations for
     commands summary
     expediting a command
     use in batch programs
     using passwords with
 Communication devices
 Communication requests
   deleting
   viewing
 Communication-device queues
    see also Printer queues, using comm devicenames
   canceling requests in
   connecting to
   disconnecting from
   using
   viewing connections to
   viewing queue information
   viewing
 Config menu
   Control services command
     adjusting service performance
     continuing a service
     pausing a service
     starting a service
     stopping a service
   Load profile command
   Log off from LAN command
   Save profile command
   Stop LAN Manager services command
     stopping a service
     stopping the Workstation service
   Workstation options command
     controlling Messenger service
     controlling Netpopup service
     viewing the workstation configuration
 Configuration, workstation
 Connecting
   defined
 ConnectingCommunication-device queues Directories, shared
    see also Printer queues
 Connections
   saving
   viewing
 Continuing a service
    see Services
 Control Panel
    see MS OS/2
 Controlling a service
    see Services
 Copying files
    see Files
 Country codes
 Current focus

     D
 Deleting
   a communication request. See Communication requests
   an alias. See Aliases
 Devicenames
   defined
   for communication-device queues
   for disks
     assigning under LAN Manager
     viewing
   for printer queues
 Directories, shared
   changing permissions for
   connecting to
   defined
   disconnecting from
   making a onetime connection to
   viewing
 DisconnectingCommunication-device queues Directories, shared
    see also Printer queues
 Disks, shared
    see Directories, shared
 Display
    see LAN Manager Screen
 Domain controller
 Domains
   belonging to
   changing your password in
   defined
   logon domain
   primary domain controller
   sending messages to
   synchronizing clocks in
   viewing
     servers in
     usernames in
   workstation domain

     E
 Error log
   changing size of
   viewing and clearing
 Error messages
   viewing information about
 Exiting the LAN Manager Screen

     F
 Files
   copying over the network
   moving over the network
   shared
     changing permissions for
     copying
     moving
     using
 Forwarding messages
    see Messages

     H
 Help system
   displaying a Help message box
   F1 key
   for error messages
   for net commands
   for the LAN Manager Screen
   getting help

     I
 Image scanners
    see also Communication-device queues

     L
 LAN Manager Screen
   closing dialog boxes
   controlling the display
   dialog boxes
     check boxes
     command buttons
     list boxes
     option buttons
     text boxes
   elements
   exiting
   help system
   menus
     Accounts menu
     Config menu
     Help menu
     Message menu
     Status menu
     View menu
   Print Manager changes
     using drop-down lists
   starting
 LAN Manager
   quitting
   starting automatically
   starting
 Language of messages, assigning
 LANMAN.INI file, defined
 Local-area network, defined
 LogError log
    see Message log
 Logging messages
    see Message log
 Logging off
 Logging on
 Logon domain
    see Domains
 Logon

     M
 Manual organization
 Manuals, LAN Manager
 Message log
   changing the log file
   controlling message logging
   default
   LANMAN\LOGS directory
   MESSAGES.LOG file
   reading
   saving
 Message menu
   Aliases command
     deleting an alias
     forwarding messages
     stopping message forwarding
   Log messages to file command
     changing the log file
     stopping the Netpopup service
   Read message log file command
   Send a typed message command
 Messages
   forwarding
     deleting an alias
     effect of multiple networks
     stopping
   Netpopup service
     closing a message box
   network
     assigning a language
   printing
   reading
     the message log
     with Netpopup started
   receiving
     messages for several users
     your own messages
   sending
     broadcasting a message
     to a user
     to a workstation
 Messenger service
   defined
   pausing
   starting
   stopping
 Modems, shared
    see also Communication-device queues
 Moving files
    see Files
 MS OS/2
   Control Panel
   Print Manager
     changes

     N
 Names
   printer names
     requirements
 Net access
 Net comm
 Net config peer
 Net config workstation
 Net continue
 Net copy
 Net error
 Net forward
 Net help
 Net helpmsg
 Net load
 Net log
 Net logoff
 Net logon
   used in example
 Net move
 Net name
 Net password
 Net pause
 Net print
 Net run
 Net save
 Net send
 Net start messenger
 Net start netpopup
 Net start peer
 Net start workstation
 Net statistics
 Net stop
 Net time
 Net use
 Net view
 Net who
 Net
 Netpopup service
   closing a message box
   message logging, used with
   pausing
   starting
   stopping
 Network products, working with other
 Network
    see Local-area network
 Non-LAN Manager servers, connecting to
 Notational conventions

     P
 Passwords
   changing
   commands, used with
   logging on with
 Pausing a service
    see Services
 Peer service
   adjusting performance of
   features
   IPC$
   pausing
   starting
   statistics
   stopping
   viewing settings
 Permissions
   changing with the net access command
   defined
 Print jobs
   defined
   deleting
   finding a job number
   holding and releasing
   viewing
 Print Manager
   cloning a printer queue
   creating a printer queue
   menus and commands with LAN Manager
   Refresh menu
     Refresh interval command
   Setup menu
     Printers command
     Queues command
 Printer queues
   cloning
     with Print Manager
   connecting to
   controlling queued jobs
   creating
     with Print Manager
   defined
   disconnecting from
   making a onetime connection
   Print Manager
   spooled and unspooled
   using comm devicenames with
   using
   viewing
   with several printers
 Printers, shared
    see Printer queues
 Printers
   name requirement
 Printing messages
    see Messages
 Profiles
   appending connections
   creating
   defined
   loading
   modifying
 Programs
   running on a server
 PUBLIC directory
    see also Peer service

     Q
 Quitting LAN Manager

     R
 Reading messagesMessages
    see Netpopup service
 Remote programs
    see also Net run
 Resources, shared
   viewing
 Resources, sharedCommunication-device queues Directories, shared
    see also Printer queues

     S
 Saving connectionsConnections
    see Profiles
 Scanners, shared
    see also Communication-device queues
 Screen
    see LAN Manager Screen
 Sending messages
    see Messages
 Servers
   defined
   running a program on
   viewing
 Services
    see also the listing for the service
   adjusting
   Alerter
   continuing
   controlling
   defined
   Messenger
     starting
     stopping
   Netpopup
     starting
     stopping
   pausing
   Peer
     starting
     stopping
   starting
   stopping
   Workstation
     starting
     stopping
 Shared resources
   viewing
 Shared resourcesCommunication-device queues Directories, shared
    see also Printer queues
 Sharing
   defined
 Spooler, LAN Manager
 Starting
   a service. See Services
   LAN Manager Screen. See LAN Manager Screen
 Statistics
   viewing
 Status menu
   Error log command
     viewing and clearing the error log
   Workstation statistics command
     viewing and clearing statistics
 Stopping
   a service. See Services
   message forwarding. See Messages

     T
 Time
   synchronizing the workstation's clock

     U
 Users
   viewing
     users logged on in a domain
     users with connections to a server
     your own account

     V
 View menu
   Available resources command
     connecting to a communication-device queue
     connecting to a printer queue
     connecting to a shared directory
     viewing shared directories
     viewing shared resources
   Comm-device queues command
     deleting a communication request
     viewing communication requests
     viewing queues
   Printer queues command
     deleting a print job
     holding a print job
     releasing a print job
     viewing a queue
   Used resources command
     connecting to a printer queue
     connecting to a shared directory
     disconnecting from a communication-device queue
     disconnecting from a printer queue
     disconnecting from a shared directory
     viewing communication-device-queue connections
     viewing connections to shared resources
     viewing printer queue connections
   Users on a domain command
     viewing users logged on in a domain
   Users on a server command
     viewing users with connections to a server
 ViewingView menu
    see Net view

     W
 Workstation domain
    see Domains
 Workstation service
   adjusting display for
   adjusting performance of
   Messenger service, used with
   Netpopup service, used with
   pausing
     effect on other services
   starting with batch program
   starting
   stopping
   viewing configuration of
 Workstation
   defined
   viewing configuration of
   viewing connections
   viewing statistics



