CHAPTER 9

 Programming Technical Reference - IBM
 Copyright 1988, Dave Williams


                       INSTALLABLE DEVICE DRIVERS


DEVICE DRIVER FORMAT

 A device driver is a COM or EXE file that contains all of the code needed to
control an add-in device. It has a special header to identify it as a device,
define the strategy and interrupt entry points, and define its various
attributes.

NOTE: For device drivers the COM file must not use the ORG 100h. Since the
      driver does not use the program segment prefix, it is simply loaded
      without offset. Therefore the memory image file must have an origin of 0 
      (ORG 0 or no ORG statement).


TYPES OF DEVICES

 There are two types of devices: Character devices and Block devices. Their 
attributes are as follows:

 Character devices are designed to do character I/O in a serial manner like 
CON, AUX, and PRN. These devices have names like CON, AUX, CLOCK$, and you can 
open channels (handles or FCBs) to do input and output with them. Because 
character devices have only one name, they can only support one device.

 Block devices are the fixed disk or diskette drives on a system. They can do 
random I/O in peices called blocks, which are usually the physical sector 
size of the disk. These devices are not named as character devices are, and 
cannot be opened directly. Instead they are mapped by using the drive letters 
A,B,C etc. Block devices can have units within them. In this way, a single block
driver can be responsible for one or more disk drives. For example, the first
block device driver can be responsible for drives A,B,C,and D. This means it has
four units defined and therefore takes up four drive letters. The position of
the driver in the chain of all drives determines the way in which the drive
letters correspond. For example, if the device driver is the first block driver
in the device chain, and it defines four units, then these devices are called
A,B,C, and D. If the second device driver defines three units, then those units
are E,F,and G. DOS 1.x allows 16 devices. DOS 2.x allows 63, and DOS 3.x allows
26. It is recommended that drivers limit themselves to 26 devices for
compatibility with DOS 3.x.

 DOS doesn't care about the position of installed character devices versus 
block devices. The installed character devices get put into the chain ahead of
resident character devices so that you can override the system's default driver
for CON etc.

 Although it is sometimes beleived that installed block devices get linked into
the chain BEHIND the resident block devices, if you look at the actual device
chain, this is not true (though it is true in the sense that installed block
devices get assigned drive letters in sequence, starting with the next letter
after the last one assigned to a resident block device).



DEVICE HEADER

 A device driver requires a device header at the beginning of the file. This 
is the format of the device header:

                Field                           Length

        Pointer to next device header field     dword
        Attribute                               word
        Pointer to device strategy routine      word
        Pointer to device interrupt routine     word
        Name/Unit field                         8 bytes


POINTER TO NEXT DEVICE HEADER FIELD

 The device header field is a pointer to the device header of the next device 
driver. It is a doubleword field that is set by DOS at the time the device 
driver is loaded. The first word is an offset and the second word is the 
segment.
 If you are loading only one device driver, set the device header field to -1 
before loading the device. If you are loading more than one device driver, set 
the first word of the device driver header to the offset of the next device 
driver's header. Set the device driver header field of the last device driver 
to -1.


ATTRIBUTE FIELD

 The attribute field is a word field that describes the attributes of the 
device driver to the system. The attributes are:

        word    bits (decimal)
                15      1       character device
                        0       block device
                14      1       supports IOCTL
                        0       doesn't support IOCTL
                13      1       non-IBM format (block only)
                        0       IBM format
                12      not documented - unknown
                11      1       supports removeable media
                        0       doesn't support removeable media
                10      reserved for DOS
             through
                4       reserved for DOS
                3       1       current block device
                        0       not current block device
                2       1       current NUL device
                        0       not current NUL device
                1       1       current standard output device
                        0       not current standard output device



BIT 15  is the device type bit. Use it to tell the system the that driver is a
        block or character device.

BIT 14  is the IOCTL bit. It is used for both character and block devices. Use 
        it to tell DOS whether the device driver can handle control strings
        through the IOCTL function call 44h.
         If a device driver cannot process control strings, it should set bit
        14 to 0. This way DOS can return an error is an attempt is made through
        the IOCTL function call to send or receive control strings to the
        device. If a device can process control strings, it should set bit 14 
        to 1. This way, DOS makes calls to the IOCTL input and output device 
        function to send and receive IOCTL strings.
         The IOCTL functions allow data to be sent to and from the device 
        without actually doing a normal read or write. In this way, the device
        driver can use the data for its own use, (for example, setting a baud
        rate or stop bits, changing form lengths, etc.) It is up to the device
        to interpret the information that is passed to it, but the information
        must not be treated as a normal I/O request.


BIT 13  is the non-IBM format bit. It is used for block devices only. It affects
        the operation of the Get BPB (BIOS parameter block) device call.

BIT 11  is the open/close removeable media bit. Use it to tell DOS if the 
        device driver can handle removeable media. (DOS 3.x only)

BIT 3   is the clock device bit. It is used for character devices only. Use it 
        to tell DOS if your character device driver is the new CLOCK$ device.

BIT 2   is the NUL attribute bit. It is used for character devices only. Use it
        to tell DOS if your character device driver is a NUL device. Although
        there is a NUL device attribute bit, you cannot reassign the NUL device.
        This is an attribute that exists for DOS so that DOS can tell if the NUL
        device is being used.

BIT 0   are the standard input and output bits. They are used for character
  &     devices only. Use these bits to tell DOS if your character device 
BIT 1   driver is the new standard input device or standard output device.


POINTER TO STRATEGY AND INTERRUPT ROUTINES

 These two fields are pointers to the entry points of the strategy and input 
routines. They are word values, so they must be in the same segment as the 
device header.


NAME/UNIT FIELD

 This is an 8-byte field that contains the name of a character device or the 
unit of a block device. For the character names, the name is left-justified and
the space is filled to 8 bytes. For block devices, the number of units can be 
placed in the first byte. This is optional because DOS fills in this location 
with the value returned by the driver's INIT code.


CREATING A DEVICE DRIVER

 To create a device driver that DOS can install, perform the following:

1) Create a memory image file or an EXE file with a device header at the start 
   of the file.
2) Originate the code (including the device header) at 0, not 100h.
3) Set the next device header field. Refer to "Pointer to Next Device Header 
   Attribute Field" for more information.
4) Set the attribute field of the device header. Refer to "Attribute Field" for 
   more information.
5) Set the entry points for the interrupt and strategy routines.
6) Fill in the name/unit field with the name of the character device or the unit
   number of the block device.

 DOS always processes installable character device drivers before handling the 
default devices. So to install a new CON device, simply name the device CON. 
Be sure to set the standard input device and standard output device bits in 
the attribute field of a new CON device. The scan of the device list stops on 
the first match so the installable device driver takes precedence.

NOTE: Because DOS can install the device driver anywhere in memory, care 
      must be taken in any FAR memory references. You should not expect that 
      your driver will be loaded in the same place every time.



INSTALLING DEVICE DRIVERS

 DOS installs new device drivers dynamically at boot time by reading and 
processing the DEVICE command in the config.sys file. For example, if you have 
written a device driver called DRIVER1, to install it put this command in the 
CONFIG.SYS file:
                             DEVICE=DRIVER1

 DOS calls a device driver at its strategy entry point first, passing in a 
request header the information describing what DOS wants the device driver 
to do.
 This strategy routine does not perform the request but rather queues the 
request or saves a pointer to the request header. The second entry point is 
the interrupt routine and is called by DOS immediately after the strategy 
routine returns. The interrupt routine is called with no parameters. Its 
function is to perform the operation based on the queued request and set up 
any return infromation.
 DOS passes the pointer to the request header in ES:BX. This structure consists
of a fixed length header (Request Header) followed by data pertinent to the 
operation to be performed.

NOTE: It is the responsibility of the device driver to preserve the machine 
      state. For example, save all registers on entry and restore them on exit.

 The stack used by DOS has enough room on it to save all the registers. If more
stack space is needed, it is the device driver's responsibility to allocate and
maintain another stack.
 All calls to execute device drivers are FAR calls. FAR returns should be 
executed to return to DOS.



INSTALLING CHARACTER DEVICES

 One of the functions defined for each device is INIT. This routine is called 
only once when the device is installed and never again. The INIT routine returns
the following:

A) A location to the first free byte of memory after the device driver, like a
   TSR that is stored in the terminating address field. This way, the 
   initialization code can be used once and then thrown away to save space.
B) After setting the address field, a character device driver can set the status
   word and return.


INSTALLING BLOCK DEVICES

 Block devices are installed in the same way as character devices. The 
difference is that block devices return additional information. Block devices 
must also return:

A) The number of units in the block device. This number determines the logical 
   names the devices will have. For example, if the current logical device 
   letter is F at the time of the install call, and the block device driver INIT
   routine returns three logical units, the letters G, H, and I are assigned to 
   the units. The mapping is determined by the position of the driver in the 
   device list and the number of units in the device. The number of units 
   returned by INIT overrides the value in the name/unit field of the device 
   header.
B) A pointer to a BPB (BIOS parameter block) pointer array. This is a pointer 
   to an array of *n* word pointers there *n* is the number of units defined. 
   These word pointers point to BPBs. This way, if all of the units are the 
   same, the entire array can point to the same BPB to save space.
    The BPB contains information pertinent to the devices such as the sector 
   size, number of sectors per allocation unit, and so forth. The sector size of
   the BPB cannot be greater than the maximum allotted size set at DOS 
   initialization time.
   NOTE: This array must be protected below the free pointer set by the return.
C) The media descriptor byte. This byte is passed to devices so that they know 
   what parameters DOS is currently using for a particular drive unit.

 Block devices can take several approaches. They can be *dumb* or *smart*. A 
dumb device would define a unit (and therefore a BPB) for each possible media 
drive combination. Unit 0=drive 0;single side, unit 1=drive 0;double side, etc.
 For this approach, the media descriptor bytes would mean nothing. A smart 
device would allow multiple media per unit. In this case, the BPB table 
returned at INIT must define space large enough to acommodate the largest 
possible medias supported (sector size in BPB must be as large as maximum 
sector size DOS is currently using). Smart drivers will use the media byte to 
pass information about what media is currently in a unit.


REQUEST HEADER

 The request header passes the information describing what DOS wants the 
device driver to do.

旼컴컴컴컴컫컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴커
  Length                         F i e l d                                   
쳐컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   BYTE    Length in bytes of the request header plus any data at end        
쳐컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   BYTE    Unit code. The subunit the operation is for (minor device)        
           Has no meaning for character devices.                             
쳐컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   WORD    Command code                                                      
쳐컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 8 BYTES   Deserved for DOS                                                  
쳐컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
(variable) Data appropriate for the operation                                
읕컴컴컴컴컨컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴켸


UNIT CODE FIELD

 The unit code field identifies which unit in a block device driver the request
is for. For example, if a block device driver has three units defined, then the
possible values of the unit code field would be 0,1,and 2.


COMMAND CODE FIELD

 The command code field in the request header can have the following values:

      CODE         FUNCTION

        0       INIT
        1       MEDIA CHECK      (block only,NOP for character)
        2       BUILD BPB        (block only, NOP for character)
        3       IOCTL input      (called only if IOCTL bit is 1)
        4       INPUT            (read)
        5       NONDESTRUCTIVE INPUT NO WAIT (character devices only)
        6       INPUT STATUS     (character devices only)
        7       INPUT FLUSH      (character devices only)
        8       OUTPUT           (write)
        9       OUTPUT           (write with verify)
        10      OUTPUT STATUS    (character devices only)
        11      OUTPUT FLUSH     (character devices only)
        12      IOCTL OUTPUT     (called only if IOCTL bit is 1)
        13      DEVICE OPEN      (called only if OPEN/CLOSE/RM bit is set)
        14      DEVICE CLOSE     (called only if OPEN/CLOSE/RM bit is set)
        15      REMOVEABLE MEDIA (called only if OPEN/CLOSE/RM bit is set and
                                  device is block)

NOTE: Command codes 13,14,and 15 are for use with DOS versions 3.x.


STATUS FIELD
The status field in the request header contains:

旼컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴커
            D E V I C E    D R I V E R    S T A T U S    F I E L D            
쳐컴컴컴쩡컴쩡컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   B    0                                                                   
        1                                                                   
   Y    2                                                                   
        3    Error message return code                                      
   T    4    (with bit 15=1)                                                
        5                                                                   
   E    6                                                                   
        7                                                                   
쳐컴컴컴탠컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
  bit   8    DONE                                                           
쳐컴컴컴탠컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
  bit   9    BUSY                                                           
쳐컴컴컴탠컴좔컴컴쩡컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
  bits  10 - 14    Reserved                                                 
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컫컴컴좔컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
  bit   15    Error                                                         
읕컴컴컴좔컴컨컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴켸

 The status word field is zero on entry and is set by the driver interrupt 
routine on return.

BIT 15  is the error bit. If this bit is set, the low 8 bits of the status word
        (7-0) indicate the error code.

BITS 14-10 are reserved.

BIT 9   is the busy bit. It is only set by status calls and the removable media 
        call. See "STATUS" and "REMOVABLE MEDIA" in this chapter for more 
        information about the calls.

BIT 8   is the done bit. If it is set, it means the operation is complete. The 
        driver sets the bit to 1 when it exits.

 The low 8 bits of the status word define an error message if bit 15 is set. 
These errors are:

        00h  Write protect violation   01h  Unknown unit
        02h  Device not ready          03h  Unknown command
        04h  CRC error                 05h  Bad drive request structure length
        06h  seek error                07h  unknown media
        08h  sector not found          09h  printer out of paper
        0Ah  write fault               0Bh  read fault
        0Ch  general failure           0Dh  reserved
        0Eh  reserved                  0Fh  invalid disk change


DEVICE DRIVER FUNCTIONS

 All strategy routines are called with ES:BX pointing to the request header. 
The interrupt routines get the pointers to the request header from the queue 
the strategy routines store them in. The command code in the request header 
tells the driver which function to perform.
NOTE: all DWORD pointers are stored offset first, then segment.

The following function call parameters are described:

        INIT
        MEDIA CHECK
        BUILD BPB (BIOS PARAMETER BLOCK)
        MEDIA DESCRIPTOR BYTE
        INPUT OR OUTPUT
        NONDESTRUCTIVE INPUT NO WAIT
        STATUS
        FLUSH
        OPEN OR CLOSE
        REMOVABLE MEDIA


INIT
Command code=0
        ES:BX   pointer to request header. Format of header:
                length           field
                13 bytes  request header
                 dword    number of units (not set by character devices)
                 dword    Ending address of resident program code
                 dword    Pointer to BPB array (not set by character devices)
                          /pointer to remainder of arguments
                  byte    Drive number (3x only)

The driver must do the following:

        A) set the number of units (block devices only)
        B) set up the pointer to the BPB array (block devices only)
        C) perform any initialization code (to modems, printers, etc)
        D) Set the ending address of the resident program code
        E) set the status word in the request header.

 To obtain information obtained from CONFIG.SYS to a device driver at INIT 
time, the BPB pointer field points to a buffer containing the information 
passed from CONFIG.SYS following the =. The buffer that DOS passes to the 
driver at INIT after the file specification contains an ASCII string for the 
file OPEN. The ASCII string (ending in 0h) is terminated by a carriage return 
(0Dh) and linefeed (0Ah). If there is no parameter information after the file 
specification, the file specification is immediately followed by a linefeed 
(0Ah). This information is read-only and only system calls 01h-0Ch and 30h can 
be issued by the INIT code of the driver.
 The last byte parameter contains the drive letter for the first unit of a 
block driver. For example, 0=A, 1=B etc.
 If an INIT routine determines that it cannot set up the device and wants to 
abort without using any memory, follow this procedure:

        A) set the number of units to 0
        B) set the ending offset address at 0
        C) set the ending offsret segment address to the code segment (CS)

NOTE: If there are multiple device drivers in a single memory image file, the 
      ending address returned by the last INIT called is the one DOS uses. It is
      recommended that all device drivers in a single memory image file return
      the same ending address.


MEDIA CHECK
command code=1
        ES:BX   pointer to request header. Format of header:
                length          field
                13 bytes  request header
                byte      media descriptor from DOS
                byte      return
                dword     returns a pointer to the previous volume ID (if bit
                          11=1 and disk change is returned) (DOS 3.x)

 When the command code field is 1, DOS calls MEDIA CHECK for a drive unit and 
passes its current media descriptor byte. See "Media Descriptor Byte" later in 
this chapter for more information about the byte. MEDIA CHECK returns one of 
the following:

        A) media not changed             C) not sure
        B) media changed                 D) error code

The driver must perform the following:
        A) set the status word in the request header
        B) set the return byte
               -1       media has been changed
                0       don't know if media has been changed
                1       media has not been changed

 DOS 3.x: If the driver has set the removable media bit 11 of the device header
attribute word to 1 and the driver returns -1 (media changed), the driver must 
set the DWORD pointer to the previous volume identification field. If DOS 
determines that the media changed is an error, DOS generates an error 0Fh 
(invalid disk change) on behalf of the device. If the driver does not implement
volume identification support, but has bit 11 set to 1, the driver should set a
pointer to the string "NO NAME",0.


MEDIA DESCRIPTOR
 Currently the media descriptor byte has been defined for a few media types. 
This byte should be idetnical to the media byte if the device has the non-IBM 
format bit off. These predetermined values are:

media descriptor byte =>    1  1  1  1  1  0  0  0
 (numerical order)          7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0

       BIT                MEANING        

        0       1=2 sided       0=not 2 sided
        1       1=8 sector      0=not 8 sector
        2       1=removeable    0=nonremoveable
       3-7      must be set to 1


Examples of current DOS media descriptor bytes:

           media      sides   sectors  ID byte

        hard disk       *       *       0F8h
        5-1/4 floppy    2       15      0F9h
        5-1/4 floppy    1       9       0FCh
        5-1/4 floppy    2       9       0FDh
        5-1/4 floppy    2       8       0FFh
        5-1/4 floppy    1       8       0FEh
        8" floppy       1       26      0FEh *
        8" floppy       2       26      0FDh
        8" floppy       2       8       0FEh *

*NOTE: The two Media Descriptor Bytes that are the same for 8" diskettes (0FEh) 
are not a misprint. To determine whether you are using a single sided or double
sided diskette, attempt to read the second side, and if an error occurs you can
assume the diskette is single sided.


BUILD BPB (BIOS Parameter Block)
command code =2
        ES:BX   pointer to request header. Format:
                length          field
                13 bytes  request header
                byte      media descriptor from DOS
                dword     transfer address (buffer address)
                dword     pointer to BPB table

DOS calls BUILD BPB under the following two conditions:

A) If "media changed" is returned
B) If "not sure" is returned, there are no used buffers. Used buffers are 
   buffers with changed data that has not yet been written to the disk.

The driver must do the following:

A) set the pointer to the BPB
B) set the status word in the request header.

 The driver must determine the correct media type currently in the unit to 
return the pointer to the BPB table. The way the buffer is used (pointer 
passed by DOS) is determined by the non-IBM format bit in the attribute field 
of the device header. If bit 13=0 (device is IBM compatible), the buffer 
contains the first sector of the FAT (most importantly the FAT ID byte). The 
driver must not alter this buffer in this case. If bit 13=1 the buffer is a 
one sector scratch area which can be used for anything.
 For drivers that support volume identification and disk change, the call 
should cause a new volume identification to be read off the disk. This call 
indicates that the disk has been legally changed.
 If the device is IBM compatible, it must be true that the first sector of the 
first FAT is located at the same sector for all possible media. This is 
because the FAT sector is read before the media is actually determined.
 The information relating to the BPB for a particular media is kept in the boot
sector for the media. In particular, the format of the boot sector is:

旼컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴커
 For DOS 2.x, 3 byte near jump (0E9h) For DOS 3.x, 2 byte near jump (0EBh)    
 followed by a NOP (90h)                                                      
쳐컴컴컴컴컫컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 8 bytes    OEM name and version                                             
쳐컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컫컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   BYTE          sectors per allocation unit (must be a power of 2)         
쳐컴컴컴컴캑     쳐컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴
   WORD     B    reserved sectors (strarting at logical sector 0)           
쳐컴컴컴컴캑     쳐컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴
   BYTE          number of FATs                                             
쳐컴컴컴컴캑     쳐컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴
   WORD     P    max number of root directory entries                       
쳐컴컴컴컴캑     쳐컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴
   WORD          number of sectors in logical image (total number of        
                 sectors in media, including boot sector directories, etc.) 
쳐컴컴컴컴캑  B  쳐컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴
   BYTE          media descriptor                                           
쳐컴컴컴컴캑     쳐컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴
   WORD          number of sectors occupied by a single FAT                 
쳐컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컨컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   WORD     sectors per track                                                
쳐컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   WORD     number of heads                                                  
쳐컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   WORD     number of hidden sectors                                         
읕컴컴컴컴컨컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴켸

 The three words at the end return information about the media. The number of
heads is useful for supporting different multihead drives that have the same
storage capacity but a different number of surfaces. The number of hidden
sectors is useful for drive partitioning schemes.


INPUT / OUTPUT
command codes=3,4,8,9,and 12
        ES:BX   pointer to request header. Format:
                length          field
                13 bytes  request header
                byte      media descriptor byte
                dword     transfer address (buffer address)
                word      byte/sector count
                dword     (DOS 3.x) pointer to the volume ID if error code 0Fh
                          is returned

The driver must perform the following:
        A) set the status word in the request header
        B) perform the requested function
        C) set the actual number of sectors or bytes tranferred

NOTE: No error checking is performed on an IOCTL I/O call. However the driver 
      must set the return sector or byte count to the actual number of bytes 
      transferred.


The following applies to block device drivers: 

 Under certain circumstances the device driver may be asked to do a write 
operation of 64k bytes that seems to be a *wrap around* of the transfer address
in the device driver request packet. This arises due to an optimization added to
write code in DOS. It will only happen in writes that are within a sector size
of 64k on files that are being exetended past the current end of file. It is 
allowable for the device driver to ignore the balance of the write that wraps 
around, if it so chooses. For example, a write of 10000h bytes worth of sectors
with a transfer address of XXXX:1 ignores the last two bytes.

Remember: A program that uses DOS function calls can never request an input or 
          output function of more than 0FFFFh bytes, therefore, a wrap around 
          in the transfer (buffer) segment can never occur. It is for this 
          reason you can ignore bytes that would have wrapped around in the 
          tranfer segment.

 If the driver returns an error code of 0Fh (invalid disk change) it must put 
a DWORD pointer to an ASCIIZ string which is the correct volume ID to ask the 
user to reinsert the disk.

DOS 3.x:
 The reference count of open files on the field (maintained by the OPEN and 
CLOSE calls) allows the driver to determine when to return error 0Fh. If there 
are no open files (reference count=0) and the disk has been changed, the I/O 
is all right, and error 0Fh is not returned. If there are open files 
(reference count > 0) and the disk has been changed, an error 0Fh condition 
may exist.


NONDESTRUCTIVE INPUT NO WAIT
command code=5
        ES:BX   pointer to request header. Format:
                length          field
                13 bytes  request header
                byte      read from device

The driver must do the following:
        A) return a byte from the device
        B) set the status word in the request header.

 If the character device returns busy bit=0 (characters in the buffer), then 
the next character that would be read is returned. This character is not removed
form the buffer (hence the term nondestructive input). This call allows DOS to
look ahead one character.


STATUS
command codes=8 and 10
        ES:BX   pointer to a request header. Format:
                length          field
                13 bytes  request header

This driver must perform the following:
        A) perform the requested function
        B) set the busy bit
        C) set the status word in the request header.

The busy bit is set as follows:

 For input on character devices: if the busy bit is 1 on return, a write 
request would wait for completion of a current request. If the busy bit is 0, 
there is no current request. Therefore, a write request would start immediately.

 For input on character devices with a buffer: if the busy bit is 1 on return, 
a read request does to the physical device. If the busy bit is 0, there are 
characters in the device buffer and a read returns quickly. It also indicates 
that a user has typed something. DOS assumes all character devices have a type-
ahead input buffer. Devices that do not have this buffer should always return 
busy=0 so that DOS does not hang waiting for information to be put in a buffer
that does not exist.


FLUSH
command codes=7 and 11
        ES:BX   pointer
                length          field
                13 bytes  request header

 This call tells the driver to flush (terminate) all pending requests that it 
has knowledge of. Its primary use is to flush the input queue on character 
devices.
 The driver must set the status word in the request header upon return.


OPEN or CLOSE (3.x)
command codes=13 and 14
        ES:BX   pointer
                length          field
                13 bytes  static request header

 These calls are designed to give the device information about the current file
activity on the device if bit 11 of the attribute word is set. On block 
devices, these calls can be used to manage local buffering. The device can keep
a reference count. Every OPEN causes the device to increment the reference
count. Every CLOSE causes the device to decrement the reference count. When the
reference count is 0, if means there are no open files in the device. Therefore,
the device should flush buffers inside the device it has written to because now
the user can change the media on a removeable media drive. If the media had been
changed, it is advisable to reset the reference count to 0 without flushing the
buffers. This can be thought of as "last close causes flush". These calls are 
more useful on character devices. The OPEN call can be used to send a device 
initialization string. On a printer, this could cause a string to be sent to set
the font, page size, etc. so that the printer would always be in a known state
in the I/O stream. Similarly, a CLOSE call can be used to send a post string 
(like a form feed) at the end of an I/O stream. Using IOCTL to set these pre and
post strings provides a flexible mechanism of serial I/O device stream control.

NOTE: Since all processes have access to STDIN,STDOUT,STDERR,STDAUX, and STDPRN
      (handles 0,1,2,3,and 4) the CON, AUX, and PRN devices are always open.


REMOVABLE MEDIA (DOS 3.x)
command code=15
        ES:BX   pointer
                length          field
                13 bytes  status request header

 To use this call, set bit 11 of the attribute field to 1. Block devices can 
only use this call through a subfunction of the IOCTL function call (44h). 
This call is useful because it allows a utility to know whether it is dealing 
with a nonremovable media drive or with a removable media drive. For example, 
the FORMAT utility needs to know whether a drive is removable or nonremovable 
because it prints different versions of some prompts.

 The information is returned in the BUSY bit of the status word. If the busy 
bit is 1, the media is nonremovable. 

NOTE: No error checking is performed. It is assumed that this call always 
      succeeds.


THE CLOCK$ DEVICE

 To allow a clock board to be integrated into the system for TIME and DATE,
the CLOCK$ device is used. This device defines and performs functions like any
other character device (most functions will be reset done bit, reset error bit,
and return). When a read or write to this device occurs, 6 bytes are
transferred. The first 2 bytes are a word, which is the count of days since
01-01-80. The third byte is minutes, the fourth is hours, the fifth is
hundredths of a second, and the sixth is seconds. 
Reading the CLOCK$ device gets the date and time, writing to it sets the date 
and time.


