CHAPTER 6 

 Programming Technical Reference - IBM
 Copyright 1988, Dave Williams

                     DOS CONTROL BLOCKS AND WORK AREAS

When DOS loads a program, it first sets aside a section of memory for the 
program called the program segment, or code segment. Then it constructs a 
control block called the program segment prefix, or PSP, in the first 256 
(100h) bytes. Usually, the program is loaded directly after the PSP at 
100h.
 The PSP contains various information used by DOS to help run the program.  
The PSP is always located at offset 0 within the code segment. When a program 
recieves control certain registers are set to point to the PSP. For a COM 
file, all registers are set to point to the beginning of the PSP and the 
program begins at 100h. For the more complex EXE file structures, only DS and 
ES registers are set to point to the PSP. The linker passes the settings for 
the DS, IP, SS, and SP registers and may set the starting location in CS:IP to 
a location other than 100h.



IBMBIO provides an IRET instruction at absolute address 847h for use as a 
dummy routine for interrupts that are not used by DOS. This lets the 
interrupts do nothing until their vectors are rerouted to ttheir appropriate 
handlers.

A storage block is used by DOS to record the amount and location of allocated 
memory withion the machine's address spacd.
 A storage block, a Program Segment Prefix, and an environment area are built 
by FDOS for each program currently resident in the address space. The storage 
block is used by DOS to record the address range of memory allocated to a 
program. IOt us used by DOs to find th enext availible area to load  a program 
and to determine if there is a\enough memory to run that porogram. When a 
memory area is in use, it is said to be allocated. Then the program ends, or 
releases memory, it is said to bne deallocated. 
 A storage block contains a pointer ro rhe Program Segment Prefix assoiciated 
with each program. This control block is constructed by IBMDOS for the purpose 
opf providing stanfdardized areas for DOS/program communication., Within ghr 
PSP are arsas which  are used to save interrupt vectors, pass parameters to 
the program, record disk directory information, and to buffer disk reads and 
writes. This control block is 100h bytes in lengrth and is followed by the 
program mopdule loaded by DOS. 
 The PSP contains a pointer to the environment area for that program. This 
area contains a copy of the current DOS SET, PROMPT, COMSPEC, and PATH values 
as well as any user-set variables. The program may examine and modify this 
information as desired. 
 Each storage block is 10h bytes long, although only 5 bytes are currently 
used by DOS. The first byte contains 4Dh (a capital M) to indicate that it 
contains a pointer to the next storage block. A 5Ah (a capital Z) in the 
first byte of a storage block indicatres there are no more storage blocks 
following this one (it is the end of the chain). The identifier byte is 
followeed by a 2 byte segment number for the associated PSP for that program. 
The next 2 bytes contain the number of segments what are allocated to the 
program. If this is not the last storage block, then another storage block 
follows the allocated memory area.
 When thge storage block contains zero for the nuymber of allocated segments, 
then no storage is allocated to thius block and the next storage block 
immediately follows this one. This can ha-p[en whjen memory is allocated and 
then deallocated repeatedly.
 IBMDOS constructs a storage block and PSP before loading the command 
interpreter (default is COMMAND.COM).


If the copy of COMMAND.COM is a secondary copy, it will lack an environment 
address as PSP+2Ch.
 


 The Disk Transfer Area (DTA)

 DOS uses an area in memory to contain the data for all file reads and writes 
that are performed with FCB function calls. This are is known as the disk 
transfer area. This disk transfer area (DTA) is sometimes called a buffer. 
It can be located anywhere in the data area of your application program and 
should be set by your program.

 Only one DTA can be in effect at a time, so your program must tell DOS what 
memory location to use before using any disk read or write functions. Use 
function call 1Ah (Set Disk Transfer Address) to set the disk transfer address.
Use function call 2Fh (Get Disk Transfer Address) to get the disk transfer 
address. Once set, DOS continues to use that area for all disk operations until
another function call 1Ah is issued to define a new DTA. When a program is given
control by COMMAND.COM, a default DTA large enough to hold 128 bytes is 
established at 80h into the program's Program Segment Prefix.

 For file reads and writes that are performed with the extended function calls,
there is no need to set a DTA address. Instead, specify a buffer address when 
you issue the read or write call.


DOS Program Segment

 When you enter an external command or call a program through the EXEC function 
call, DOS determines the lowest availible address space to use as the start of 
available memory for the program being started. This area is called the Program
Segment.
 At offset 0 within the program segment, DOS builds the Program Segment Prefix 
control block. EXEC loads the program after the Program Segment Prefix (at
offset 100h) and gives it control.
 The program returns from EXEC by a jump to offset 0 in the Program Segment 
Prefix, by issuing an int 20h, or by issuing an int 21h with register AH=00h or 
4Ch, or by calling location 50h in the PSP with AH=00h or 4Ch.
 It is the responsibility of all programs to ensure that the CS register 
contains the segment address of the Program Segment Prefix when terminating by
any of these methods except call 4Ch.

 All of these methods result in returning to the program that issued the EXEC. 
During this returning process, interrupt vectors 22h, 23h, and 24h (Terminate, 
Ctrl-Break, and Critical Error Exit addresses) are restored from the values 
saved in the PSP of the terminating program. Control is then given to the 
terminate address.


When a program receives control, the following conditions are in effect:

For all programs:

1) The segment address of the passed environment is contained at offset 2Ch in 
   the Program Segment Prefix.

2) The environment is a series of ASCII strings totalling less than 32k bytes
   in the form:       NAME=parameter      The default environment is 160 bytes.
    Each string is terminated by a byte of zeroes, and the entire set of strings
   is terminated by abother byte of zeroes. Following the byte of zeroes that 
   terminates the set of environment string is a set of initial arguments passed
   to a program that contains a word count followed by an ASCIIZ string. The 
   ASCIIZ string contains the drive, path, and filename.ext of the executable 
   program. Programs may use this area to determine where the program was loaded
   from. The environment built by the command processor (and passed to all 
   programs it invokes) contains a COMSPEC=string at a minimum (the parameter on
   COMSPEC is the path used by DOS to locate COMMAND.COM on disk). The last PATH
   and PROMPT commands issued will also be in the environment, along with any 
   environment strings entered through the SET command. 
    The environment that you are passed is actually a copy of the invoking 
   process's environment. If your application terminates and stays resident 
   through int 27h, you should be aware that the copy of the environment passed 
   to you is static. That is, it will not change even if subsequent PATH,
   PROMPT, or SET commands are issued.
 
   The environment can be used to transfer information between processes or to
   store strings for later use by application programs. The environment is
   always located on a paragraph boundary. This is its format:
        byte    ASCIIZ string 1
        byte    ASCIIZ string 2
            ....
        byte    ASCIIZ string n
        byte    of zeros (0)
   Typically the environment strings have the form:
        parameter = value
   Following the byte of zeros in the environment, a WORD indicates the number 
   of other strings following. 

   If the environment is part of an EXECed command interpreter, it is followed 
   by a copy of the DS:DX filename passed to the child process. A zero value 
   causes the newly created process to inherit the parent's environment.

3) Offset 80h in the PSP contains code to invoke the DOS function dispatcher.
   Thus, by placing the desired function number in AH, a program can issue a
   long call to PSP+50h to invoke a DOS function rather than issuing an int 21h.

4) The disk transfer address (DTA) is set to 80h (default DTA in PSP).

5) File Control Blocks 5Ch and 6Ch are formatted from the first two parameters 
   entered when the command was invoked. Note that if either parameter contained
   a path name, then the corresponding FCB will contain only a valid drive
   number. The filename field will not be valid.

6) An unformatted parameter area at 81h contains all the characters entered
   after the command name (including leading and imbedded delimiters), with 80h
   set to the number of characters. If the <, >, or | parameters were entered
   on the command line, they (and the filenames associated with them) will not
   appear in this area, because redirection of standard input and output is
   transparent to applications.

(For EXE files only)
7) DS and ES registers are set to point to the PSP.

8) CS, IP, SS, and SP registers are set to the values passed by the linker.

(For COM files only)
9) For COM files, offset 6 (one word) contains the number of bytes availible in 
   the segment.

10) Register AX reflects the validity of drive specifiers entered with the
    first two parameters as follows:
        AL=0FFh is the first parameter contained an invalid drive specifier,
                otherwise AL=00h.
        AL=0FFh if the second parameter contained an invalid drive specifier, 
                otherwise AL=00h.

11) All four segment registers contain the segment address of the inital 
    allocation block, that starts within the PSP control block. All of user
    memory is allocated to the program. If the program needs to invoke another
    program through the EXEC function call (4Bh), it must first free some memory
    through the SETBLOCK function call to provide space for the program being
    invoked.

12) The Instruction Pointer (IP) is set to 100h.

13) The SP register is set to the end of the program's segment. The segment size
    at offset 6 is rounded down to the paragraph size.

14) A word of zeroes is placed on top of the stack.


 The PSP (with offsets in hexadecimal) is formatted as follows:

旼컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴커
     P  R  O  G  R  A  M       S  E  G  M  E  N  T       P  R  E  F  I  X     
쳐컴컴컴쩡컴컴컴컴컫컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 offset   size                        C O N T E N T S                       
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0000h  2 bytes   int 20h                                                   
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0002h  2 bytes   segment address, end of allocation block                  
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0004h  1 byte    reserved, normally 0                                      
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0005h  5 bytes   long call to MSDOS function dispatcher                    
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 000Ah  4 bytes   previous termination handler interrupt vector (int 22h)   
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 000Eh  4 bytes   previous contents of ctrl-C interrupt vector (int 23h)    
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0012h  4 bytes   prev. critical error handler interrupt vector (int 24h)   
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0016h  22 bytes  reserved for DOS                                          
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 002Ch  2 bytes   segment address of environment block                      
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 002Eh  34 bytes  reserved, DOS work area                                   
읕컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
          4 bytes   stores the calling process's stack pointer when          
                    switching to DOS's internal stack.                       
旼컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0050h   3 bytes  int 21h, RETF instructions                                
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0053h   2 bytes  reserved                                                  
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0055h   7 bytes  reserved, or FCB#1 extension                              
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 005Ch            default File Control Block #1                             
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 006Ch            default File Control Block #2 (overlaid if FCB #1 opened) 
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0080h   1 byte   parameter length                                          
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 0081h            parameters                                                
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컵컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 00FFh  128 bytes command tail and default Disk Transfer Area (DTA)         
읕컴컴컴좔컴컴컴컴컨컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴켸

1. The first segment of availible memory is in segment (paragraph) form. For 
   example, 1000h would respresent 64k.

2. The word at offset 6 contains the number of bytes availible in the segment.

3. Offset 2Ch contains the segment address of the environment.

4. Programs must not alter any part of the PSP below offset 5Ch.

offset 0 contains hex bytes CD 20, the int 20h opcode. A program can end
       by making a jump to this location when the CS points to the PSP.
       For normal cases, int 21, function 4Ch should be used.

offset 2 contains the segment-paragraph address of the end of memory as 
        reported by DOS. (which may not be the same as the real end of RAM).
        Multiply this number by 10h or 16 to get the amount of memory availible.

offset 4 reserved

offset 05 contains a long call to the DOS function dispatcher. Programs may 
       jump to this address instead of calling int 21 if they wish. 

offsets 10, 14, 18  vectors

offset 2C is the segment:offset address of the environment for the program 
       using this particular PSP.

offset 2E The DWORD at PSP+2EH is used by DOS to store the calling process's
       stack pointer when switching to DOS's own private stack - at the end of
       a DOS function call, SS:SP is restored from this address.

offset 50h contains a long call to the DOS function dispatcher.

offsets 5C, 65, 6C  contain FCB information for use with FCB function calls. 
        The first FCB may overlay the second if it is an extended call; your
        program should revector these areas to a safe place if you intend to
        use them.

offset 80h and 81h contain th elength and value of parameters passed on the 
       command line. 

offset FF contains the DTA




STANDRD FILE CONTROL BLOCK

 The standard file control block is defined as follows, with the offsets in 
decimal:

旼컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴커
                 F I L E      C O N T R O L      B L O C K                    
쳐컴컴컴쩡컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 Bytes                            Function                                   
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   0    Drive number. For example:                                           
        Before open:    00h = default drive                                  
                        01h = drive A:                                       
                        02h = drive B: etc.                                  
        After open:     00h = drive C:                                       
                        01h = drive A:                                       
                        02h = drive B: etc.                                  
        0 is replaced by the actual drive number during open.                
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
  1-8   Filename, left justified with trailing blanks. If a reserved device  
        name is placed here (such as PRN) do not include the optional colon. 
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
  9-11  Filename extension, left justified with trailing blanks.             
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 12-13  Current block number relative to beginning of file, starting with 0  
        (set to 0 by the open function call). A block consists of 128        
        records, each of the size specified in the logical record size field.
        The current block number is used with the current record field       
        (below) for sequential reads and writes.                             
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 14-15  Logical record size in bytes. Set to 80h by the OPEN function call.  
        If this is not correct, you must set the value because DOS uses it   
        to determine the proper locations in the file for all disk reads and 
        writes.                                                              
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 16-19  File size in bytes. In this 2 word field, the first word is the      
        low-order part of the size.                                          
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 20-21  Date the file was created or last updated. The mm/dd/yy are mapped   
        as follows:                                                          
                15  14  13  12  11  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0         
                y   y   y   y   y   y   y  m  m  m  m  d  d  d  d  d         
        where:            mm is 1-12                                         
                          dd is 1-31                                         
                          yy is 0-119 (1980-2099)                            
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 22-31  Reserved for system use.                                             
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
  32    Current relative record number (0-127) within the current block.     
        (See above). You must set this field before doing sequential         
        read/write operations to the diskette. This field is not initialized 
        by the open function call.                                           
         If the record size is less than 64 bytes, both words are used.      
        Otherwise, only the first 3 bytes are used. Note that if you use the 
        File Control Block at 5Ch in the program segment, the last byte of   
        the FCB overlaps the first byte of the unformatted parameter area.   
읕컴컴컴좔컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴켸

note 1) An unopened FCB consists of the FCB prefix (if used), drive number, and 
        filename.ext properly filled in. An open FCB is one in which the 
        remaining fields have been filled in by the CREAT or OPEN function 
        calls.
     2) Bytes 0-5 and 32-36 must be set by the user program. Bytes 16-31 are set
        by DOS and must not be changed by user programs.
     3) All word fields are stored with the least significant byte first. For 
        example, a record length of 128 is stored as 80h at offset 14, and 00h 
        at offset 15.



EXTENDED FILE CONTROL BLOCK

 The extended file control block is used to create or search for files in the 
disk directory that have special attributes.

It adds a 7 byte prefix to the FCB, formatted as follows:

旼컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴커
       E X T E N D E D     F I L E      C O N T R O L      B L O C K          
쳐컴컴컴쩡컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
 Bytes                            Function                                   
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
   0    Flag byte containing 0FFh to indicate an extended FCB.               
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
  1-6   Reserved                                                             
쳐컴컴컴탠컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴캑
  6-7   Attribute byte. Refer to function call 11h (search first) for        
        details on using the attribute bits during directory searches. This  
        function is present to allow applications to define their own files  
        as hidden (and thereby excluded from normal directory searches) and  
        to allow selective directory searches.                               
읕컴컴컴좔컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴켸
                                     
 Any reference in the DOS function calls to an FCB, whether opened or unopened,
may use either a normal or extended FCB. If you are using an extended FCB, the 
appropriate register should be set to the first byte of the prefix, rather than
the drive-number field.



MEMORY CONTROL BLOCKS

 DOS keeps track of allocated and availible memory blocks, and provides three 
function calls for application programs to communicate their memory needs to 
DOS. These calls are 48h to allocate a memory block, 49h to free a previously 
allocated memory block, and 4Ah (SETBLOCK) to change the size of an allocated 
memory block.


CONTROL BLOCK

DOS manages memory as follows:

 DOS build a control block for each block of memory, whether free or allocated.
For example, if a program issues an "allocate" (48h), DOS locates a block of
free memory that satisfies the request, and then "carves" the requested memory 
out of that block. The requesting program is passed the location of the first 
byte of the block that was allocated for it - a memory management control block,
describing the allocated block, has been built for the allocated block and a 
second memory management control block describes the amount of space left in the
original free block of memory. When you do a setblock to shrink an allocated 
block, DOS builds a memory management control block for the area being freed and
adds it to the chain of control blocks. Thus, any program that changed memory 
that is not allocated to it stands a chance of destroying a DOS memory 
management control block. This causes unpredictable results that don't show up 
until an activity is performed where DOS uses its chain of control blocks. The 
normal result is a memory allocation error, which means a system reset will be 
required.

 When a program (command or application program) is to be loaded, DOS uses the 
EXEC function call 4Bh to perform the loading.

 This is the same function call that is availible to applications programs for 
loading other programs. This function call has two options:

      Function 00h, to load and execute a program (this is what the command
                    processor uses to load and execute external commands)

      Function 03h, to load an overlay (program) without executing it.

 Although both functions perform their loading in the same way (relocation is 
performed for EXE files) their handling of memory management is different.


FUNCTION 0: For function 0 to load and execute a program, EXEC first allocates 
the largest availible block of memory (the new program's PSP will be at offset 
0 in that block). Then EXEC loads the program. Thus, in most cases, the new 
program owns all the memory from its PSP to the end of memory, including memory
occupied by the transient parent of COMMAND.COM. If the program were to issue 
its own EXEC function call to load and execute another program, the request 
would fail because no availible memory exists to load the new program into.

NOTE: For EXE programs, the amount of memory allocated is the size of the 
      program's memory image plus the value in the MAX_ALLOC field of the file's
      header (offset 0Ch, if that much memory is availible. If not, EXEC 
      allocates the size of the program's memory image plus the value in the 
      MIN_ALLOC field in the header (offset 0Ah). These fields are set by the 
      Linker).

 A well-behaved program uses the SETBLOCK function call when it receives 
control, to shrink its allocated memory block down to the size it really needs.
A COM program should remember to set up its own stack before doing the SETBLOCK,
since it is likely that the default stack supplied by DOS lies in the area of 
memory being used. This frees unneeded memory, which can be used for loading 
other programs.

 If the program requires additional memory during processing, it can obtain 
the memory using the allocate function call and later free it using the free 
memory function call.

 When a program is loaded using EXEC function call 00h exits, its initial 
allocation block (the block beginning with its PSP) is automatically freed 
before the calling program regains control. It is the responsibility of all 
programs to free any memory they allocate before exiting to the calling 
program.


 FUNCTION 3: For function 3, to load an overlay, no PSP is built and EXEC 
assumes the calling program has already allocated memory to load the new program
into - it will NOT allocate memory for it. Thus the calling program should 
either allow for the loading of overlays when it determines the amount of memory
to keep when issuing the SETBLOCK call, or should initially free as much memory 
as possible. The calling program should then allocate a block (based on the size
of the program to be loaded) to hold the program that will be loaded using the 
"load overlay" call. Note that "load overlay" does not check to see if the 
calling program actually owns the memory block it has been instructed to load 
into - it assumes the calling program has followed the rules. If the calling 
program does not own the memory into which the overlay is being loaded, there is
a chance the program being loaded will overlay one of the control blocks that 
DOS uses to keep track of memory blocks.

 Programs loaded using function 3 should not issue any SETBLOCK calls since
they don't own the memory they are operating in. (This memory is owned by the
calling program)

 Because programs loaded using function 3 are given control directly by (and 
return contrrol directly to) the calling program, no memory is automatically 
freed when the called program exits. It is up to the calling program to 
determine the disposition of the memory that had been occupied by the exiting 
program. Note that if the exiting program had itself allocated any memory, it 
is responsible for freeing that memory before exiting.


 MEMORY CONTROL BLOCKS

 Only the first 5 bytes of the memory control block are used. The first byte 
will always have the value of 4Dh or 5Ah. The value 5Ah indicates the block is 
the last in a chain, all memory above it is unused. 4Dh means that the block is
intermediate in a chain, the memory above it belongs to the next program or to 
DOS.

 The next two bytes hold the PSP segment address of the program that owns the 
corresponding block of memory. A value of 0 means the block is free to be 
claimed, any other value represents a segment address. Bytes 3 and 4 indicate 
the size in paragraphs of the memory block. If you know the address of the first
block, you can find the next block by adding the length of the memory block plus
1 to the segment address of the control block. 

 Finding the first block can be difficult, as this varies according to the DOS 
version and the configuration. 

 The remaining 11 bytes are not currently used by DOS, and may contain "trash" 
characters left in memory from previous applications.

  If DOS determines that the allocation chain of memory control blocks has been 
corrupted, it will halt the system and display the message "Memory Allocation 
Error", and the system will halt, requiring a reboot.

 Each memory block consists of a signature byte (4Dh or 5Ah) then a word which
is the PSP value of the owner of the block (which allocated it), followed by a 
word which is the size in paragraphs of the block. The last block has a 
signature of 5Ah. All others have 4Dh. If the owner is 0000 then the block is 
free.

 User memory is allocated from the lowest end of available memory that will 
satisfy the request for memory.



