 Microsoft Operating System/2 Getting Started








 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
               Microsoft(R) Operating System/2 Getting Started

                                 Version 1.2
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Information in this document is subject to change without notice and does
 not represent a commitment on the part of Microsoft Corporation. The
 software and/or databases described in this document are furnished under a
 license agreement or nondisclosure agreement. The software and/or databases
 may be used or copied only in accordance with the terms of the
 agreement. The purchaser may make one copy of the software for backup
 purposes. No part of this manual and/or database may be reproduced or
 transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
 including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval
 systems, for any purpose other than the purchaser's personal use, without
 the written permission of Microsoft Corporation.

 (C) Copyright Microsoft Corporation, 1990. All rights reserved.
 Printed in the United States of America.

 Patent #4,825,358

 Patent #4,779,187

 Microsoft(R), MS(R), MS-DOS(R), the Microsoft logo, and InPort(R)
 are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation.
 IBM(R) is a registered trademark of International Business Machines
 Corporation.
 SY13238-0490 OEMO786-1Z





 Table of Contents
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ



 Welcome


 Chapter 1  Setting Up MS OS/2 and Using the Manuals


 Chapter 2  A Visual Overview of MS OS/2


 Chapter 3  Learning Basic MS OS/2 Skills




 Welcome
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Welcome to Microsoft(R) Operating System/2 (MS(R) OS/2), the operating
 system that turns your computer into a powerful tool for your business or
 personal use. In this guide, you will find instructions on how to set up MS
 OS/2 on your computer and some information about each of the manuals
 included with your MS OS/2 package. This guide also provides a visual
 introduction to MS OS/2 as well as a brief tutorial that gives you practical
 experience performing basic MS OS/2 tasks.

 If you are new to MS OS/2, it is recommended that you first install MS OS/2
 on your computer and then read Chapter 2, "A Visual Overview of MS OS/2" and
 work through the exercises in Chapter 3, "Learning MS OS/2 Basic Skills."
 These chapters will briefly acquaint you with the different operating
 environments in MS OS/2 and will give you basic information about running
 applications.

 If you have used MS OS/2 before, you may want to read Chapter 2 and then
 skim Chapter 3 for an introduction to the new and enhanced visual features
 of Presentation Manager. Then go on to the Microsoft Operating System/2
 User's Guide for details on these enhancements and the new features added to
 the applications that come with your MS OS/2 package.






 Chapter 1  Setting Up MS OS/2 and Using the Manuals
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Introduction

 This chapter lists the hardware you need to run MS OS/2 and describes some
 options that you should be familiar with before you install MS OS/2.
 Following these options are step-by-step instructions for setting up and
 starting MS OS/2 on your computer.


 System Requirements

 To install and use MS OS/2, you need the following:

   ş   A personal computer with an 80286, 80386, or 80486 processor and at
       least 2.5 megabytes of memory. (If you'll be running several
       applications at once, at least 4 megabytes is highly recommended.) If
       you have added extra memory to your computer, make sure that it is
       extended memory and not expanded memory (which MS OS/2 does not
       recognize). See your hardware manuals for more information.

   ş   At least two disk drivesÄone hard-disk drive and one high-density
       floppy-disk drive. (Since the Install disk and the program disks are
       high-density disks, you must have a high-density floppy-disk drive to
       set up MS OS/2.)

   ş   A graphics display adapter supported by MS OS/2.

   ş   A mouse (recommended).




 Before You Install MS OS/2

 While you are setting up MS OS/2, you will be asked to choose particular
 options or answer questions about the kind of hardware you have. It may
 speed up your installation if you take a moment now to familiarize yourself
 with the following items:

   ş   Which file system(s) you want to use on your primary partition. You
       can choose to use the file allocation table (FAT) file system (used by
       DOS) or the high-performance file system (HPFS). During installation,
       you will be asked whether you want to reformat your hard disk. If you
       want to use the FAT file system, you do not need to reformat your hard
       disk. If you want to use HPFS, you must reformat your hard disk. Once
       you choose to reformat, you will be given the option of using FAT or
       HPFS. If you want to use both FAT and HPFS, see the following section,
       "Installing Both FAT and HPFS." For more information about using the
       HPFS, see Chapter 16, "Using the High-Performance File System," in the
       Microsoft Operating System/2 User's Guide.

   ş   The language supported by your keyboard (if you are working inside the
       United States, it is highly probable that you have a U.S. English
       keyboard).

   ş   The amount of space available on your hard disk. You need 12 megabytes
       to hold your MS OS/2 files and directories.

   ş   The type of mouse you have. In the installation program, 099
       represents a Microsoft(R) mouse with green buttons and 199 represents
       a Microsoft mouse with gray buttons (or with white buttons if it is a
       serial mouse). If you are not sure whether your mouse is an InPort,
       Serial, or Bus (Parallel) mouse, see the manual that comes with the
       mouse.

   ş   The type of ports you are going to use (communications and/or
       printer).




 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Note

 In this manual, the term "DOS" refers to the MS-DOS(R) and IBM Personal
 Computer DOS operating systems.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ


 In some cases, you will have the choice of setting up your computer to run
 with both MS OS/2 1.2 and DOS. This is called the dual-boot option, and you
 set it up from the installation program. This option is only available under
 the following conditions:

   ş   Your computer is set up for use with the FAT file system.

   ş   MS-DOS version 3.2 or later is already set up on your computer, or the
       dual-boot option for MS OS/2 1.1 is already set up on your computer.


 For more information on using the dual-boot option, see Appendix B, "Using
 MS OS/2 Dual Boot" in the Microsoft Operating System/2 User's Guide.


 Installing Both FAT and HPFS

 If you want to use both the high-performance file system (HPFS) and the file
 allocation table (FAT) file system, read this section before you install MS
 OS/2. If your computer's hard disk is already divided into two partitions or
 if you are using more than one hard disk, you will not need the instructions
 in this section. Go directly to the section, "Running the Installation
 Program."

 The following are instructions for three different hard-disk configurations.
 Select the description that describes the current status of your hard disk
 and follow those instructions to install MS OS/2.

 If your computer's hard disk is unformatted, do the following:

   1.  Complete the instructions in the section, "Running the Installation
       Program." During installation, set up a primary partition that is
       smaller than the total disk space (a minimum of 12 megabytes) and
       format it as either FAT or HPFS.

   2.  After installation, run the Presentation Manager Fixed Disk Utility,
       set up a secondary partition and logical drive, and use the format
       utility to format it as either FAT or HPFS. If you format your primary
       partition as FAT, add the following lines to the beginning of your
       CONFIG.SYS file before formatting your secondary partition as HPFS:

 IFS=C:\OS2\HPFS.IFS /c:64
 RUN=C:\OS2\CACHE





 For more information, see the Microsoft Operating System/2 User's Guide,
 Chapter 13, "Setting Up Your Hard Disk," and Chapter 16, "Using the
 High-Performance File System," and the Microsoft Operating System/2 Command
 Reference "Format" entry.

 If your computer's hard disk is formatted as one partition, using all the
 space on the disk, follow these steps:

   1.  Back up any programs or data you want to save onto floppy disks.

   2.  Use the fdisk /d utility to delete the partition (insert the MS OS/2
       Install disk, restart your computer, press ESC, and type fdisk /d).

   3.  Follow the instructions in the section, "Running the Installation
       Program." During installation, set up a primary partition that is
       smaller than the total disk space (a minimum of 12 megabytes) and
       format it as either FAT or HPFS.

   4.  After installation, run the Presentation Manager Fixed Disk Utility,
       set up a secondary partition and logical drive, and use the format
       utility to format it as either FAT or HPFS. If you format your primary
       partition as FAT, add the following lines to the beginning of your
       CONFIG.SYS file before formatting your secondary partition as HPFS:

 IFS=C:\OS2\HPFS.IFS /c:64
 RUN=C:\OS2\CACHE





 For more information, see the Microsoft Operating System/2 User's Guide,
 Chapter 13, "Setting Up Your Hard Disk," and and Chapter 16, "Using the
 High-Performance File System," and then the Microsoft Operating System/2
 Command Reference "Format" entry.

 If you currently have DOS installed on a single partition that uses all the
 space on the disk and you want to use MS OS/2 dual boot in addition to both
 FAT and HPFS, you will need to do two things: First create a new, smaller
 partition for DOS and the MS OS/2 system. Then install MS OS/2 and create a
 second partition for your HPFS drive. Follow these steps:

   1.  Start DOS from a floppy disk. If you do not have a DOS start-up disk,
       you will need to create one. (See your DOS manual for instructions.)

   2.  Back up any programs or data you want to save onto floppy disks.

   3.  Use the DOS fdisk utility to delete the existing DOS partition and
       then create a DOS partition that is smaller than the total disk (this
       allows space for the HPFS drive). The partition must have at least 12
       megabytes free after you reinstall DOS and the programs and/or data
       files you saved on floppy disks. Make the new DOS partition active.
       (See your DOS manual for instructions on using fdisk.)

   4.  Reinstall DOS on your primary partition in a subdirectory C:\DOS. (If
       the installation program does not allow you to choose C:\DOS, install
       DOS in the root directory, then create C:\DOS and copy the DOS files
       to that directory.) Copy your programs and/or files from the backup
       floppy disks into C:\DOS. (See your DOS manual for instructions.)

   5.  Restart DOS from the hard disk and verify that you have at least 12
       megabytes of free space on the C drive.

   6.  Check to see that you have the following line in your CONFIG.SYS file,
       and if not, add it to the file:

 SHELL=C:\DOS\COMMAND


       Check to see that you have the following lines in your AUTOEXEC.BAT
       file, and if not, add them to the file:

 SET COMSPEC=C:\DOS\COMMANDCOPY C:\DOS\COMMAND




   7.  Install MS OS/2 by following the instructions in the next section,
       "Running the Installation Program." MS OS/2 dual boot will be
       installed automatically. (Note: Do not choose to format the primary
       partition during installation or you will lose your DOS files.)

   8.  After installation, add the following lines to the beginning of your
       CONFIG.SYS file by using a text editor (for example, System Editor):

 IFS=C:\OS2\HPFS.IFS /c:64
 RUN=C:\OS2\CACHE




   9.  Run the Presentation Manager Fixed Disk Utility (in the Utilities
       group), and set up a secondary partition and logical drive. (This will
       be your HPFS drive.) Then restart your system.

   10. Use the MS OS/2 format utility to format the drive in your secondary
       partition as HPFS by typing the following at the command line:


 format d: /fs:hpfs




 Your system is now set up with dual boot and an HPFS drive. For more
 information, see the Microsoft Operating System/2 User's Guide, Chapter 13,
 "Setting Up Your Hard Disk," Chapter 16, "Using the High-Performance File
 System," and then the Microsoft Operating System/2 Command Reference
 "Format" entry.


 Running the Installation Program



 An installation disk, included with your MS OS/2 package, makes it easy for
 you to install MS OS/2 on your computer by following these steps:

   1.  Turn on your computer.

   2.  Put the disk labeled Install in drive A (drive A must be a
       high-density drive).

   3.  Press and hold down the CTRL key. While holding down the CTRL key,
       press and hold down the ALT key and then press the DEL key
       (CTRL+ALT+DEL).

   4.  Release all three keys and then wait for the first screen of
       information to appear. Your computer may take a moment to read the
       Install disk.

   5.  Work through the installation program by following the instructions
       you see on each screen.


 After you have completed a screen, press the ENTER key to move to the next
 screen. To move back to the previous screen, press the ESC key. If you made
 a mistake, press the ESC key repeatedly until you return to the screen where
 you made the mistake. When you have corrected your mistake, press the ENTER
 key repeatedly until you return to the screen where you want to continue
 working.


 Getting Help

 If you need help while setting up MS OS/2, press the F1 function key.
 Pressing F1 displays Help information for your current screen.

 For more general help with setting up MS OS/2, you can press F1, followed by
 F5, to display a list of Help topics. You can then choose the topic you want
 to learn more about.


 Starting MS OS/2

 To start MS OS/2, simply turn on your computer, or if your computer is
 already turned on, press CTRL+ALT+DEL to restart it. Each time you turn on
 your computer or restart it, MS OS/2 starts automatically.

 Shortly after starting MS OS/2, messages will be displayed on your screen
 while your computer loads MS OS/2 into memory. When the Desktop Manager and
 the Main-group windows appear, you are in the Presentation Manager session.


 Guide to the MS OS/2 Manuals

 Your MS OS/2 package includes the following manuals:

   ş   Microsoft Operating System/2 Getting Started (this book)ÄIncludes a
       quick guide to installing MS OS/2 on your computer, a guide to using
       the manuals, a visual introduction that identifies important parts of
       the system, and a brief tutorial to demonstrate basic skills.

   ş

   ş   Microsoft Operating System/2 User's GuideÄA complete guide to using MS
       OS/2 to do your work, organized into three parts:

 Part 1 "Using Presentation Manager"ÄProcedures for using
 the menus and commands in the Presentation Manager
 windows. Includes basic skills; running applications;
 managing files, directories, and disks; printing files; and
 changing system settings.
 Part 2 "Using Cmd and the DOS Session"ÄProcedures for
 using the MS OS/2 full-screen option to type commands,
 run programs, and create and run batch programs; also,
 instructions for running your DOS programs.
 Part 3 "Configuring and Maintaining Your System"ÄProcedures
 for system-administration tasks, such as backing up and
 configuring your system; also, instructions for using
 high-performance file system and device drivers.

   ş   Microsoft Operating System/2 Command ReferenceÄAn alphabetic reference
       to all of the MS OS/2 and DOS commands you might use with the system;
       includes syntax, options, and examples.




 Where to Go from Here

 The next chapter, "A Visual Overview of MS OS/2," contains a visual
 reference to important parts of MS OS/2 1.2. If you are new to MS OS/2, the
 overview will introduce you to some of the important parts of the interface.
 For those who have used MS OS/2 1.1, the overview will quickly describe new
 Presentation Manager features that you should become familiar with.

 Chapter 3, "Learning Basic MS OS/2 Skills," is a brief, hands-on
 introduction to MS OS/2. If you are a new user, the exercises in Chapter 3
 will give you the basic skills you need to get started using MS OS/2. If you
 are an experienced MS OS/2 user, the exercises will give you experience
 working with the improved and expanded Presentation Manager interface.






 Chapter 2  A Visual Overview of MS OS/2
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Introduction

 Microsoft Operating System/2 (MS OS/2) gives you more computing power
 through its enhanced and efficient use of your computer's memory and the
 80286, 80386, and 80486 processors. MS OS/2 has powerful multitasking
 capabilities, which allow you to run several applications at the same time.

 Not only is MS OS/2 powerful, it is also flexible, giving you several ways
 to accomplish the same kind of tasks, such as starting applications,
 configuring your system, and managing your files and directories. The MS
 OS/2 Presentation Manager environment offers you a method based on pictures
 and symbols for accomplishing your work, with windows in which you specify
 information and menus from which you choose commands. Or, if you prefer to
 type information and commands by using your keyboard, you can use the MS
 OS/2 command interpreter, cmd.

 This chapter provides you with a visually based overview of MS OS/2 and
 explains how the different components fit together. It introduces you to the
 Presentation Manager screen by using illustrations and definitions that
 describe the different parts of a Presentation Manager window. This chapter
 also briefly describes each application that comes with MS OS/2 and shows
 you how they are arranged into program groups.


 The Presentation Manager Screen



 When you start MS OS/2, the Desktop Manager and Main-group windows appear on
 your screen, running in the Presentation Manager session (a special
 graphical environment). Here are some terms that describe the elements of
 the Presentation Manager screen:

 Art                               Term/Description
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Pointer                           If you are using a mouse, an
                                   arrow-shaped pointer shows your position
                                   on the screen.

 Scroll bar                        Scroll bars may appear in a window or
                                   dialog box that contains more
                                   information than can fit in the work
                                   area. If you are using a mouse, you use
                                   scroll bars to bring the information
                                   that does not fit in the work area into
                                   view.

 System-menu box                   The System-menu box is used to display
                                   the System menu, a list of commands
                                   common to all groups and applications
                                   that run in a window. It can be used to
                                   move and size windows, to quit
                                   applications, and to close groups.

 Menu bar                          The menu bar displays the names of the
                                   menus in a Presentation Manager
                                   application or group.

 Minimize box                      If you are using a mouse, you can use
                                   the Minimize box to reduce a window to
                                   an icon. If you are not using a mouse,
                                   you can use the Minimize command on the
                                   System menu to do this.

 Maximize box                      If you are using a mouse, you can use
                                   the Maximize box to enlarge a window to
                                   fill the entire screen. If you are not
                                   using a mouse, you can use the Maximize
                                   command on the System menu to do this.

 DOS and Print Manager icons       An icon represents a window that has
                                   been reduced by using the Minimize
                                   command or the Minimize box. When you
                                   start MS OS/2, icons for Print Manager
                                   and the DOS session (the environment
                                   used to run DOS applications)
                                   automatically appear in the icon area
                                   located at the bottom of your screen.



 Working with Presentation Manager Applications

 To work with Presentation Manager applications, you use the application's
 menus shown on the menu bar. Each menu contains a list of commands that you
 can choose from to perform specific tasks. For example, by using the
 commands on the Group menu in Desktop Manager, you can create your own
 groups of applications, rename existing groups, and delete groups you no
 longer want.


 The Presentation Manager Applications in the Main Group

 The applications that come with MS OS/2 are organized into two groupsÄthe
 Main group and the Utilities group. These applications come as part of your
 MS OS/2 package and are added to the Main and Utilities groups automatically
 when you install MS OS/2 on your computer. When you first start MS OS/2, the
 Main group appears in a window on your screen. The Presentation Manager
 applications included in the Main group are described here.

 With File Manager, you can look at the directory structure of a disk drive
 and keep track of files and directories. You can perform several
 file-management tasks with File Manager, such as creating directories and
 copying, moving, and deleting files.

 You can use the MS OS/2 System Editor to create or edit text files such as
 your CONFIG.SYS file, other start-up files, and any batch files that you
 create.

 Command Reference allows you to view the contents of the Microsoft Operating
 System/2 Command Reference. Command Reference includes information on
 several topics and commands that you can view on-line while you work.


 Other Types of MS OS/2 Applications

 MS OS/2's flexibility allows you to start and use several kinds of
 applications. In addition to the Presentation Manager applications you have
 seen so far, you can also start full-screen applications and DOS
 applications.

 The MS OS/2 command interpreter, cmd, provides an alternative to
 Presentation Manager's graphical interface. Instead of choosing commands
 from menus, you type commands at a command prompt to perform tasks,
 similarly to the way you use DOS. You can run the cmd program in a window or
 in a full screen. When you run cmd in a full screen, the Presentation
 Manager session temporarily disappears from your screen.

 When you run cmd in a window, it runs in the Presentation Manager session,
 together with your Presentation Manager applications. Because cmd is not a
 Presentation Manager application, its window looks slightly different from a
 Presentation Manager application windowÄit does not have a menu bar, and the
 background is black.

 The DOS session is a special environment where you can run DOS applications.
 When you start MS OS/2, the DOS session appears as an icon in the lower-left
 corner of the Presentation Manager screen, showing you that it is available
 for your use at any time.

 Print Manager helps you manage your printing tasks. When you start MS OS/2,
 it appears as an icon at the bottom of your screen.

 MS OS/2 includes multitasking capabilities, which allow you to run several
 applications at the same time. The Task List displays a list of the
 applications that are currently running and of the program groups that are
 currently open. By using the Task List, you can switch from one application
 or group to another. When you start MS OS/2, the Task List is hidden from
 view. To display it, click the right mouse button or press CTRL+ESC.


 The Applications in the Utilities Group

 In addition to the Main group, Desktop Manager also includes the Utilities
 group. When you open the Utilities group window, you see a list of the
 Microsoft Utility programs that also come as part of your MS OS/2 package.

 Control Panel is a Presentation Manager application that you can use to
 change country settings, set up additional hardware, change the screen
 colors in the Presentation Manager session, and perform other
 system-configuration tasks.

 Printer Installer is a Presentation Manager application that you can use to
 install printers.

 These MS OS/2 Utilities are programs that you can use to maintain your
 disks:

   ş   Copy Diskette makes an exact copy of a floppy disk.

   ş   Compare Diskette compares the contents and the tracks of two floppy
       disks.

   ş   Label Diskette assigns a new volume label to a disk.

   ş   Format Diskette formats floppy disks.

   ş   Disk Information checks for errors and available storage space on your
       disks.

   ş   Fixed Disk Utility partitions your hard disk and sets up different
       drives.

   ş   Print Picture prints graphical documents on your printer.

   ş   Display Picture displays graphical documents in Presentation Manager.

   ş   Convert Picture converts files from picture-interchange format to
       metafile format for use with Presentation Manager.









 Chapter 3  Learning Basic MS OS/2 Skills
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Introduction

 This chapter briefly introduces you to some basic techniques for using MS
 OS/2 to run your applications. It contains nine exercises that will give you
 hands-on experience performing the following skills:

   ş   Selecting and starting applications

   ş   Using Help information

   ş   Switching among applications

   ş   Opening groups

   ş   Reducing and restoring application and group windows

   ş   Quitting applications and closing windows


 Before beginning the exercises, make sure you have installed and started MS
 OS/2 on your computer. Also, you may want to read Chapter 2, "A Visual
 Overview of MS OS/2," for an introduction to the screen elements in
 Presentation Manager and to the applications that come with your MS OS/2
 package. If you have not set up MS OS/2, or if you need a review on how to
 start MS OS/2, see Chapter 1, "Setting Up MS OS/2 and Using the Manuals," in
 this guide.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Note

 All examples of file and directory names in this chapter are for the file
 allocation table (FAT) file system, which is the one used by DOS and MS OS/2
 versions 1.1 and earlier. For information on using high-performance file
 system (HPFS) filenames and directory names, see the Microsoft Operating
 System/2 User's Guide, Chapter 16, "Using the High-Performance File System."

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Exercise 1: Starting an Application

 When you start MS OS/2, the first application to appear on your screen is
 Desktop Manager. Desktop Manager is the Presentation Manager application you
 use to open program groups. Each program group contains one or more
 applications. When you start MS OS/2, the Main group is open, running in its
 own window. The applications in the Main group are represented by icons,
 followed by their titles.

 To start an application from a group, point to the icon or title of the
 application you want to start and then double-click the left mouse button.
 If you are using your keyboard, use the UP or DOWN key to select it and then
 press ENTER.

 To practice starting an application, start File Manager by using either your
 mouse or keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to File Manager in the      If File Manager is not already selected,
 Main-group window, then           press the UP or DOWN key until it is
 double-click the left mouse       highlighted, then press ENTER.
 button.

 If you have a mouse, the pointer becomes a small hourglass to let you know
 that File Manager is being started. After a short pause, File Manager
 appears in a window on your screen.

 File Manager is a Presentation Manager application you can use to view and
 manage your files and directories on any disk you choose. For more
 information on using File Manager, see Chapter 3, "Using File Manager," in
 the Microsoft Operating System/2 User's Guide.


 Exercise 2: Getting Help

 If you have questions at any time while working with a Presentation Manager
 application, Help information about the task you are performing is
 available.

 To display Help information, use the F1 function key:

   ş   Press F1.


 Help information for File Manager appears in a window on your screen.

 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
 Note

 Another way to display Help information is by using the commands on the Help
 menu. The commands on the Help menu display specific types of Help
 information, such as a Help Index or Keys Help, for the application you are
 using. For more information on using the Help menu commands, see Chapter 1,
 "Learning Basic Presentation Manager Skills," in the Microsoft Operating
 System/2 User's Guide.
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ




 Scrolling the Help Window

 The scroll bar at the right of the window shows you that there is more Help
 information available than can fit in the window. To display more Help
 information, click the scroll arrows in the scroll bar. If you are using
 your keyboard, use the UP or DOWN key.

 To practice scrolling the Help text, use either your mouse or keyboard to
 scroll the text down one screenful:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the down scroll arrow    Press the DOWN key to scroll through the
 in the scroll bar, then click     Help text.
 the left mouse button to scroll
 through the Help text, one line
 at a time.

 As you continue scrolling, the scroll box moves toward the bottom of the
 scroll bar, indicating your position within the Help text. Practice
 scrolling through the Help information by using your mouse or keyboard until
 you have reached the end. You will know that you are at the end of the text
 when the scroll box reaches the bottom of the scroll bar.


 Closing the Help Window



 You can close the Help window by using either your mouse or keyboard. To
 close the Help window, do the following:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the System-menu box,     Press ESC.
 then double-click the left mouse
 button.

 The Help window disappears from your screen.


 Exercise 3: Switching Among Applications and Groups

 In MS OS/2, you can have several applications running or several groups open
 at once, but you can work with only one application or group at a time. The
 application or group you are currently working with is the active
 application or group.

 When a window becomes active, it appears in front of the other windows on
 your screen and its borders and title bar change colors. For example, File
 Manager, now at the front of your screen, is the active application.

 If you want to use an application or group other than the one that is
 currently active, you need to switch to it. The most direct way to switch to
 another application or group is by using the Task List. The Task List
 contains a list of the applications that are currently running and the
 groups that are currently open.

 To switch to another application or group, you first display the Task List
 and then choose the application or group you want to switch to from those
 listed in the Task List.


 Displaying the Task List

 To display the Task List, you use the right mouse button or the CTRL and ESC
 keys.

 Use your mouse or keyboard to practice displaying the Task List:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Move the pointer onto the screen  Press and hold down CTRL, then press ESC
 background (outside a window),    (CTRL+ESC).
 then click the right mouse
 button.

 The Task List appears, listing the applications that are currently running
 and the groups that are currently open.


 Switching to Desktop Manager

 The way you switch to another application or group with the Task List is
 similar to the way you start an application from a group windowÄyou point to
 the application or group and then double-click the left mouse button. Or,
 you can use the UP or DOWN key to select the application or group and then
 press ENTER.

 To practice switching to another application or group, you'll switch to
 Desktop Manager.

 Switch to Desktop Manager by using either your mouse or keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to Desktop Manager in the   Press the DOWN key until Desktop Manager
 Task List, then double-click the  is selected, then press ENTER.
 left mouse button.

 The Desktop Manager window appears at the front of your screen.


 Exercise 4: Opening a Group

 Two groups are listed in the Desktop ManagerÄMain and Utilities. The Main
 group opens automatically when you start MS OS/2. In this exercise,  you
 will learn how to open a group from Desktop Manager by opening the Utilities
 group. Once you have opened the Utilities group, you'll start Control Panel,
 another Presentation Manager application.


 Opening the Utilities Group

 Opening a group is similar to starting or switching to an applicationÄyou
 point to the group and then double-click the left mouse button. Or, you can
 use the UP or DOWN key to select the group and then press ENTER.

 Open the Utilities group by using either your mouse or keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to Utilities in the         Press the DOWN key to select Utilities,
 Desktop Manager window, then      then press ENTER.
 double-click the left mouse
 button.

 The Utilities-group window appears at the front of your screen, with the
 applications and programs in the Utilities group displayed in the work area.



 Starting Control Panel



 Notice that Control Panel is listed in the Utilities group. To give yourself
 more practice starting applications, start Control Panel by using either
 your mouse or keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to Control Panel in the     If Control Panel is not already selected,
 Utilities-group window, then      press the UP key to select it, then
 double-click the left mouse       press ENTER.
 button.

 Control Panel appears in a window on your screen.

 Control Panel is a Presentation Manager application that you can use to
 customize MS OS/2 to your specific needs. Part 1, "Using Presentation
 Manager," of the Microsoft Operating System/2 User's Guide, describes in
 detail how to use Control Panel.


 Exercise 5: Looking at the System Menu

 All Presentation Manager windows have a System menu. The System menu
 contains commands that let you size, move, reduce, enlarge, and close a
 window. In the next exercise, you'll learn how to use the System menu to
 reduce a window to an icon by using the keyboard. To display the System
 menu, you click the System-menu box. Or, if you are using your keyboard, you
 press SHIFT+ESC.

 Display the System menu in Control Panel by using either your mouse or
 keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the System-menu box in   Press and hold down SHIFT, then press
 the Control Panel window, then    ESC (SHIFT+ESC).
 click the left mouse button.

 The System menu appears in the Control Panel window.

 In the next exercise, you'll learn how to reduce a window to an icon by
 using the Minimize command on the System menu.


 Exercise 6: Reducing and Restoring  Application or Group Window

 Whenever you are not currently using an application or group, you can reduce
 it to an icon without quitting the application or closing the group. You
 reduce a window to an icon by using the Minimize box in the upper-right
 corner of the window. Or, if you are using your keyboard, you can use the
 Minimize command on the System menu.

 To practice reducing a window to an icon, use your mouse or keyboard to
 reduce the Control Panel window: .NE 30P

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the Minimize box in the  The System menu should be displayed on
 upper-right corner of the window,  your screen. If it is not, press
 then click the left mouse button.  SHIFT+ESC to display it, then press N to
                                   choose the Minimize command.

 Control Panel is reduced to an icon at the bottom of your screen, next to
 the DOS and Print Manager icons. The Utilities-group window, now the active
 window, appears at the front of your screen. Control Panel is still running,
 but it occupies less space on your screen than before.


 Restoring an Icon

 If you want to work in an application or group that is running as an icon,
 you first need to restore it. You restore an icon with your mouse by
 double-clicking the icon. If you are using your keyboard, you can use the
 Task List to switch to an application or group. Switching to an application
 or group that is running as an icon automatically restores it.

 To practice restoring an icon, restore the Control Panel icon to a window by
 using either your mouse or keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the Control Panel icon,  1 Press CTRL+ESC to display the Task
 then double-click the left mouse  List.
 button.

                                   2 Press the DOWN key until Control Panel
                                   is selected, then press ENTER.

 Control Panel is restored to a window on your screen.

 So far you have learned some basic techniques for starting applications,
 reducing and restoring windows, and switching between them. While learning
 these skills, you were briefly introduced to two applications, File Manager
 and Control Panel, in the Presentation Manager environment. In the next two
 exercises, you'll practice these skills while you learn how to work in two
 other MS OS/2 environmentsÄin the DOS session and in a full screen.


 Exercise 7: Looking at the DOS Command Interpreter

 The DOS command interpreter, command, is the program you use to run
 applications designed for MS-DOS or some other manufacturer's version of
 DOS. Command runs only in the DOS session, a special environment for running
 DOS applications.

 To run DOS applications, you can either add the application to a program
 group and start it from there, or you can switch to the DOS session and then
 type the command that starts the application. In this exercise, you'll
 practice switching to the DOS session. For information on adding
 applications to program groups, see Part 1, "Using Presentation Manager," of
 the Microsoft Operating System/2 User's Guide.

 The DOS session is represented by the DOS icon in the lower-left corner of
 your screen.

 To switch to the DOS session, you can restore the DOS icon or you can use
 the Task List. Use either your mouse or keyboard to switch to the DOS
 session:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the DOS icon, then       1 Press CTRL+ESC to display the Task
 double-click the left mouse       List.
 button.

                                   2 Press the DOWN key until DOS is
                                   selected, then press ENTER.

 The Presentation Manager screen temporarily disappears and you are switched
 to the DOS session. Switching to the DOS session automatically starts the
 DOS command interpreter, command, as shown by the DOS prompt in the
 upper-left corner of your screen. For more information about using command
 and the DOS session, see Chapter 2, "Running Applications with MS OS/2," and
 Part 2, "Using Cmd and the DOS Session," of the Microsoft Operating System/2
 User's Guide.


 Returning to Presentation Manager

 When you are using a DOS application, you can quickly return to Presentation
 Manager at any time by displaying the Task List.

 To display the Task List, do the following:

   ş   Press CTRL+ESC.


 The Presentation Manager screen reappears, with the Task List displayed.


 Exercise 8: Looking at the MS OS/2 Command Interpreter

 The MS OS/2 command interpreter, cmd, is another program that you can use to
 run full-screen applications (applications that do not use Presentation
 Manager menus and commands). In addition to starting a full-screen
 application from a program group, you can also start cmd and then type the
 command that starts the application.

 You can also use cmd commands and utilities to perform system-maintenance
 and file-management tasks. The cmd program can run in two different waysÄin
 a full screen or in a window.

 In this exercise, you'll learn how to run cmd in a full screen. In order to
 start cmd, you need to switch to the Main group where it is located.

 Switch to the Main group by using either your mouse or keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to Group-Main in the Task   Press the DOWN key until Group-Main is
 List, then double-click the left  selected, then press ENTER.
 mouse button.

 The Main group becomes active.

 Now you can start cmd in a full screen by using either your mouse or
 keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to OS/2 Full Screen, then   Press the DOWN key until OS/2 Full
 double-click the left mouse       Screen is selected, then press ENTER.
 button.

 The Presentation Manager screen temporarily disappears and the cmd prompt
 appears, indicating that cmd has been started.

 In addition to running the cmd program in a full screen, you can also run
 cmd in a window so that it shares the screen with your Presentation Manager
 applications. For more information on running cmd in a full screen and in a
 window, see Chapter 2, "Running Applications with MS OS/2," and Part 2,
 "Using Cmd and the DOS Session," of the Microsoft Operating System/2 User's
 Guide.

 Now, return to Presentation Manager by doing the following:

   ş   Press CTRL+ESC.


 The Presentation Manager screen reappears, with the Task List displayed. The
 cmd program is now running as an icon at the bottom of your screen.

 Now that you have been introduced to two Presentation Manager applications
 and three different ways of working with MS OS/2, the next exercise will
 demonstrate how to quit Presentation Manager applications and close windows.



 Exercise 9: Quitting Applications and Closing Windows

 In Presentation Manager, you quit an application or close a group window by
 double-clicking the System-menu box or by using the Close command on the
 System menu. To see how this works, you'll quit Control Panel.


 Quitting Control Panel



 Before you can quit an application, you must switch to it. Switch to Control
 Panel by using your mouse or keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to Control Panel in the     Press the DOWN key until Control Panel
 Task List, then double-click the  is selected, then press ENTER.
 left mouse button.

 Control Panel becomes the active application.

 You can now use either your mouse or keyboard to quit Control Panel:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the System-menu box in   1 Press SHIFT+ESC to display the System
 the Control Panel window, then    menu for Control Panel.
 double-click the left mouse
 button.

                                   2 Press C to choose the Close command.

 When you double-click the System-menu box or choose the Close command, the
 Control Panel window disappears, showing you that Control Panel is no longer
 running. If you have been working through these exercises in sequence, the
 Utilities group window becomes active, moving to the front of your screen.


 Quitting All Applications at Once

 If you have several applications running at once, you can quit all of your
 applications in one step by using the Close All command in Desktop Manager.

 To use the Close All command, you first need to switch to Desktop Manager.
 Do this by using either your mouse or keyboard:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 1 Move the mouse pointer onto     2 Press CTRL+ESC to display the Task
 the screen background and click   List.
 the right mouse button to
 display the Task List.

 3 Point to Desktop Manager and    4 Press the UP or DOWN key to select
 double-click the left mouse       Desktop Manager, then press ENTER.
 button.

 Desktop Manager becomes the active window.

 To practice quitting several applications at once, use the Close All command
 to quit File Manager and the cmd program:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 1 Point to the Desktop menu in    2 Press ALT, then D to display the
 Desktop Manager, then click the   Desktop menu (ALT,D).
 left mouse button.

 3 Point to the Close All command,  4 Press the A key to choose the Close
 then click the left mouse button.  All command.

 A message appears, asking you to confirm your decision to close all of your
 applications.

 Respond to the message by doing the following:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the Close All button,    Press the LEFT key to select the Close
 then click the left mouse button.  All button, then press ENTER.



 A message appears, asking you to confirm your decision to quit cmd (OS/2
 Full Screen).

 Respond to the message by doing the following:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the Yes button, then     Press the LEFT key to select the Yes
 click the left mouse button.      button, then press ENTER.

 The OS/2 icon disappears, indicating that the OS/2 command interpreter, cmd,
 is no longer running. Another message appears, asking you to confirm your
 decision to quit File Manager.

 Respond to the message by doing the following:

 Mouse                             Keyboard
 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

 Point to the Yes button, then     Press ENTER. (The Yes button is already
 click the left mouse button.      selected, so you do not need to press
                                   the LEFT key to select it.)

 The File Manager window disappears, indicating that File Manager is no
 longer running. The Utilities group becomes active.


 Summary

 This chapter has introduced you to some basic MS OS/2 skills so that you can
 get started working with your OS/2 and DOS applications. By working through
 the exercises, you learned how to start applications from a group, reduce
 and restore applications and groups, and switch among them by using the Task
 List. To learn how to perform additional Presentation Manager skills, such
 as sizing and moving windows and using dialog boxes, see Chapter 1,
 "Learning Basic Presentation Manager Skills," in the Microsoft Operating
 System/2 User's Guide. For more detailed information on running
 applications, see Chapter 2, "Running Applications with MS OS/2," in the
 Microsoft Operating System/2 User's Guide. .EM

